But the sense of urgency for this meeting matches the rage felt by both Israelis and Palestinians after yesterday's violence.
Today Israel buried one of its two soldiers beaten to death bay a mob of Palestinians yesterday.
Today in Jerusalem, Israeli security forces barred Palestinians under the age of 45 from praying at the al-Aqsa mosque.
Young Palestinians prayed outside and some young men were asked and beaten by Israeli police which may help make clear why arranging a summit is so difficult.
And why the political leaders will have such a hard time keeping the streets -- getting the streets calm.
ABC's Gillian Findlay reports tonight from Palestinian Gaza.
On the streets of Gaza today, talk of summits and peace was the last thing many Palestinians wanted to hear.
Only a day after Israeli missiles destroyed two police boats here, one of them very close to Mr. Arafat's own office.
Today, Israel released footage of yesterday's other attacks shot from inside a helicopter gun ship.
These missiles landed in the city of Ramallah.
With Israeli gun boats continuing to control the coast today, Gaza police were taking no chances.
Abandoning their stations for the city's main square.
What Israel did yesterday has turned anger here to fury.
It is war, Palestinians say, and Mr. Arafat has no business talking peace.
You want a war?
Yes.
Why?
I hope.
Why?
Because no peace.
After all this, no peace.
At another rally in Georgia today, Islamic leaders called openly for terror attacks on Israel.
Extremist groups have a lot of support these days and a lot of power.
This afternoon, a crowd of angry Muslims set fire to a hotel and to homes of people who they say sold alcohol.
Palestinian police did little to stop them.
Even if Mr. Arafat goes to a summit, and even if he signs an agreement, there is no guarantee any more that his people will listen.
Gillian Findlay, ABC News, Gaza.
At the bottom of the sea.
Two months after the submarine "Kursk" went down with 118 men on board, divers have managed to get inside.
They found five bodies so far.
And today, they found a note, written after a pair of explosions ripped through the hull and sent the "Kursk" into the depths of the Barents see.
Here's ABC's bob woodruff.
The note was discovered by divers inside one compartment of the submarine, on the body of 27-year-old lieutenant captain Dmitry Kolesnikov, photographed here on board the "Kursk" three years ago.
"I am writing blindly," he wrote apparently in darkness.
"None of us can get to the surface."
Russian officials believe the note was written at least two hours after the sub began to sink.
"All the crew from the sixth, seventh and eighth compartments went over to the ninth."
Kolesnikov wrote, "There are 23 people here.
We made this decision as a result of the accident."
The note contains no new evidence about what sank the "Kursk," whether it was an internal explosion or a collision.
But it does contradict the official Russian version that was given to family members, that all 118 men had died instantly.
Today, the chief of Russia's navy was forced to admit to the families he was wrong, that some of the crew not only survived, according to Kolesnikov's note,
Two or three tried to get out through the escape hatch.
But it may have been flooded.
Today, Kolesnikov's widow could not hold back her tears.
"It's horribly painful, it's awful," she said.
"I had a feeling that he didn't die immediately, and it turned out my feeling was right."
She also says her husband had a premonition.
Last summer, before he went to sea, he gave her his dog tag and a crucifix, and said he may not be coming back.
Bob Woodruff, ABC news, London.
In news overseas, at a United Nations environmental summit in Johannesburg, South Africa, representatives from 122 nations signed an agreement banning the use of 12 highly toxic chemicals.
Among them, dioxins and other chemicals, which are known as "the dirty dozen."
They have been linked to cancer, birth defects, and other genetic abnormalities.
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets across the Middle East Thursday, demonstrating against military strikes on Iraq and calling on Muslims to wage jihad against the United States and its allies.
Lebanon and the Palestinian Authority issued fierce denunciations of the US-led attacks, while the Egyptian government daily Al-Ahram warned it marked "the beginning an era of US colonisation that will benefit only Israel".
Protests against the action aimed at toppling Iraqi President Saddam Hussein were held in cities across Libya, Egypt and Lebanon, as well as in Amman, Damascus and the Gaza Strip.
However, there were no reports of protests against the war from the Gulf states, many of whom are host to US military personnel.
Saudi Arabia, however, expressed its "deep concern" and regret over the start of US military operations.
Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal spoke of the "kingdom's hope for a quick halt in military action and for the return to peaceful efforts", the state SPA news agency reported.
In Riyadh's first reaction to the start of the against, he also called for Iraq's "unity, internal security and territorial integrity" to be preserved and rejected military occupation.
Lebanese President Emile Lahoud, meanwhile, was more forthright, strongly denouncing Washington's "aggression" and warning that it could have repercussions beyond the borders of the pariah state.
"We have warned against the marginalisation of the United Nations ... and we see this aggression today plunging the world into a tunnel where one cannot see the end," he said in a statement.
"For these reasons, we judge that it is necessary that the forces of peace and those who believe in right and justice take the necessary and rapid steps to halt this dangerous slide into war against Iraq which will result in heavy human and material losses."
The Palestinian Authority also condemned Thursday's early morning missile strikes on Iraq, and warned Israel not to exploit the conflict.
"We Palestinians are against the war and we totally condemn this war in the Middle East.
A solution must be found to this problem through diplomatic means, with the international community," local authorities minister Saeb Erakat said.
"We are warning Israel not to exploit this war against Iraq to carry out more attacks against the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and destroy the Palestinian Authority and the peace process," he said.
The radical Palestinian movement Islamic Jihad warned that "the war against Iraq is a war against the whole region", while Hamas issued a chilling warning against those taking part in the war against Iraq.
"The aggression by the vile Americans and the war against Iraq signifies a war against all Arabs and Muslims around the world," said Hamas senior official Abdul Aziz al-Rantissi.
The war "shows the impotence of all Arab states.
We call on all Arab states to act immediately to defend Iraq and counter the US war," he said.
"I don't think America will win this war, as our jihad (holy war) and our resistance will teach the Americans and British a lesson they will never forget," he said.
State radio in Syria accused the United States and its allies of wanting to get their "hands on Iraq's oil and wealth and impose their hegemony on the world".
In the Egyptian capital, 10 demonstrators and at least four policeman were injured in clashes after several thousand demonstrators took to the streets near the US and British embassies.
Riot police intervened after the protestors, who included hundreds of students from the American University in Cairo, rallied on the city's central Tahrir Square, close to both the university campus and the US embassy.
More than 1,000 people also gathered at Cairo's Al-Azhar Islamic University, where they burned an American flag and demanded the expulsion of the ambassadors of the United States, Britain, Spain and Israel.
Demonstrations also took place in the northern Egyptian cities of Alexandria, Tanta and Kafr el-Sheikh.
In Amman, three protestors were hospitalised after some 500 Jordanian lawyers staged a sit-in at the main court house after being forcibly blocked by riot police from marching towards the Iraqi embassy to show their solidarity.
In Lebanon, hundreds of students gathered on the campuses of the Arab University of Beirut and the American University of Beirut calling for the assassination of US President George W. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
South of the capital in Sidon, some 1,500 schoolboys denounced "the Bush assassin" and the "silence of the Arab leaders who sold out Iraq".
Fifteen people were killed and more than 30 wounded Wednesday as a suicide bomber blew himself up on a student bus in the northern town of Haifa, the first bombing in Israel in exactly two months.
Several hours later, dozens of Israeli tanks advanced into the northern Gaza Strip backed by helicopters which fired at least three rockets in the Jabaliya area, Palestinian security sources said.
Palestinian medical sources said 60-year-old Mohammed al-Biyari was killed in his home near Jabaliya refugee camp by the rocket fire and another wounded.
A second rocket landed in farmlands and the other hit a house inside the refugee camp, but without causing further casualties, Palestinian security sources said.
Two 13-year-old children were among those killed in the Haifa bus bombing, Israeli public radio said, adding that most of the victims were youngsters.
The army said two soldiers were also among the dead.
The bus was ripped to shreds while travelling between a residential area and Haifa university.
Of the 33 injured still in hospital late Wednesday, two were in intensive care and six others in serious condition, the radio said.
Israel's night-time raid in Gaza involving around 40 tanks and armoured vehicles came after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon convened his security cabinet to discuss a response to the bomb attack.
Israeli media said the retaliation was unlikely to be on a scale that would risk disrupting US preparations for war on Iraq.
The Palestinian suicide bomber on the Haifa bus came from the southern West Bank town of Hebron, public radio said, naming him as 20-year-old Mahmoud Hamadan Salim Qawasmi.
Apart from his ID card, also found in the wreckage were the remains of a letter allegedly outlining his plan to carry out a suicide attack and praising the September 2001 destruction of the World Trade Centre in New York, it said.
Israeli police were not immediately available for comment, but Palestinian sources in Hebron said Mahmoud Qawasmi was a 21-year-old student with links to the Islamic radical group Hamas.
Israeli forces moved into Hebron's Al-Sheikh district where his family lived and arrested Qawasmi's brother and father after the bombing, they said.
Without claiming responsibility, Hamas and another hardline group, Islamic Jihad, said the blast was revenge for a string of bloody Israeli army raids into the Gaza Strip in recent weeks.
But the Palestinian Authority condemned the attack, saying it would divert international sympathy away from the far higher Palestinian civilian death toll.
"We condemn all attacks against civilians including today's attack in Haifa," said information minister Yasser Abed Rabbo.
The Palestinian leadership said the attack would serve as "a pretext for Israel's government and occupation army to step up its deadly campaign which caused the deaths of 77 Palestinians in February".
It was the first bomb attack inside Israel since January 5, and came just days after the hawkish Sharon appointed the most right-wing government in Israel's history on a pledge to get tough on security.
In the January attack, two Palestinian suicide bombers blew themselves up in central Tel Aviv, killing 23 other people.
Israeli government spokesman Avi Pazner called the latest deadly blast a "very grave attack" and said the Jewish state would take "vigorous action against the terrorist organisations".
He told AFP that Israeli intelligence had been dealing with at least 40 tip-offs of impending attacks when the Haifa bus was blown up.
US President George W. Bush condemned the "attack on innocents in Israel," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said, adding that "his message to the terrorists is: Their efforts will not be succcessful.
"He will continue to pursue the path to peace in the Middle East."
EU foreign policy supremo Javier Solana likewise slammed the attack, although he also took a jab at Israel, saying, "There have been too many civilians killed in the last weeks and the last days."
In London, a spokesman for the British prime minister said Tony Blair "condemns absolutely what has happened".
The spokesman added that he "would obviously call on all sides to do what they can to break the cycle of violence, because it is only through engagement that we can realise the vision everyone wants to see.
"There needs to be dialogue in order for this to be resolved."
The bus attack came just two days after Israeli forces staged a bloody raid into a refugee camp in central Gaza targeting a founding member of Hamas, which has spearheaded suicide bombings against the Jewish state.
Hamas vowed to continue its attacks, while the Palestinian Authority accused Israel of trying to disrupt top-level Palestinian meetings to discuss reforms of Arafat's administration.
Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erakat said international intervention was needed to break the cycle of violence.
Eight people, including a pregnant woman and a 13-year-old child were killed in Monday's Gaza raid, provoking US-led international calls for Israeli restraint.
And on Tuesday, Israeli troops shot dead an elderly Palestinian shepherd outside a Jewish settlement on the edge of Gaza City.
In the West Bank, an eight-year-old Palestinian boy as well as his brother and a sister were wounded late Wednesday by Israeli gunfire in a village north of the town of Ramallah, their elder sister said.
Thousands of fresh US troops headed for Iraq Thursday as British Prime Minister Tony Blair and US President George W. Bush discussed the effort to oust Saddam Hussein, which some senior US military officials warn could last months.
About 1,000 soldiers from the US Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade parachuted into an airfield in a Kurdish-controlled area of northern Iraq, establishing a base through which to bring in more troops and tanks, Pentagon officials said.
And some 12,000 soldiers from the US Army's 4th Infantry Division, which was supposed to have gone into northern Iraq through Turkey, began flying out of Fort Hood, Texas, Thursday to the region, a military fort spokeswoman told AFP.
The soldiers are to meet up with ships transporting their equipment, which is arriving in Kuwait from the Mediterranean, where it had been idling for weeks on navy ships awaiting Turkey's decision.
The war in Iraq could last months and require considerable US military reinforcements to assure a victory, the Washington Post reported Thursday, quoting senior US military officials.
Sandstorms, dangerously long supply lines and a recalcitrant enemy "has led to abroad reassessment by some top generals of US military expectations and timelines," the Post reports.
"Tell me how this ends," one senior officer asked the Post.
Most US army commanders believe it is critical to pause the breakneck advance towards Baghdad to secure the supply lines and make sure weapons are operable and troops resupplied after days of powerful sandstorms and damage inflicted by Iraqi attacks, the Post reports.
The Post also quoted Central Intelligence Agency and Pentagon intelligence analysts complaining that Bush officials largely ignored their warning that Iraqi irregular forces would use guerrilla tactics and offer significant resistance.
Publicly US officials have insisted that the war is going according to plan, and the most advanced US forces are currently some 100 kilometers (60 miles) outside of Baghdad.
US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld dismissed worries that there were insufficient forces in the Gulf region if the battle for Baghdad goes wrong.
After briefing US senators on the war, Rumsfeld told reporters that the number of forces "has been increasing and it will continue to do so until it is finished."
Meanwhile Blair arrived in Washington late Wednesday for two days of talks with Bush at the Camp David presidential retreat.
Talks were to focus on how to run a post-Saddam Iraq, with Washington resisting a large United Nations role.
Blair faces an uphill battle to win Bush over to giving the UN oversight of a post-Saddam administration, as Washington officials are still angry at Germany, Russia, and especially France, over the failure to secure UN Security Council approval for military action.
Blair and Bush were to hold a joint press conference at 1600 GMT Thursday.
Britain has deployed some 45,000 troops to fight with the more than 250,000 US soldiers lined up against Iraqi troops.
Bush gave a new, stronger warning that the war could become drawn out.
"As they approach Baghdad, our fighting units are facing the most desperate elements of a doomed regime," Bush told cheering military personnel Wednesday at the Florida headquarters of Central Command, which is running the campaign.
"We cannot predict the final day of the Iraqi regime, but I can assure you -- and I assure the long-suffering people of Iraq -- there will be a day of reckoning for the Iraqi regime, and that day is drawing near," he said.
At the last minute, Bush withdrew a phrase in his speech saying the campaign was "ahead of schedule."
A senior administration official said the president had decided to be cautious.
Bush pointedly paid tribute to the 48-nation "coalition of the willing" -- particularly Britain -- that is publicly backing the campaign.
Separately, US Secretary of State Colin Powell emphasized US determination to pursue the military campaign despite the diplomatic pressure Washington faces at the United Nations.
"We are interested in concluding this conflict, not having a pause right now or stopping right now, but concluding this as quickly as possible so we can get on with the rebuilding of Iraq and putting in place a better system of governance," Powell said in an interview with the Al-Jazeera Arab
television network.
Powell, the most moderate member of the Bush cabinet, said he fully agreed with the president's policy on Iraq and had no plans to leave.
"Personally, I'm very much in sync with the president and he values my services," he said in an interview with National Public Radio.
Meanwhile the Wall Street Journal reported that several British and US oil companies have quietly advised US and British forces on how oil fields operate so they could safeguard the fields in Iraq.
The companies, including Britain's BP PLC and the Texas-based Boots and Coots International Well Control Inc., were not paid for their consultations, but allied military engineers said their advice was critical.
Some 2,500 mainly university students formed a human chain in Japanese characters spelling out "No War" in Osaka on Sunday to protest against the ongoing US-led military campaign in Iraq.
"We cannot forgive this war," Miyako Fuji, 20, one of the rally's organisers told Jiji news agency.
"I want to join together the feelings of each of us as individuals who oppose the war."
Protesters, who exceeded the 2,000 expected to show up at the park at Osaka Castle in the city's downtown neighbourhood, carried placards that read "Stop war" and "Love and Peace" while forming the human chain after 3:00 pm (0600 GMT), Jiji said.
The protest follows a string of others involving tens of thousands of peace activists across Japan since January.
According to a poll by Kyodo news agency released Saturday, 78 of 100 people surveyed opposed the military action in Iraq.
A separate poll of 1,846 adults by the leading Yomiuri newspaper published Tuesday showed 64 percent felt Japan had "no choice" but to back the United States, with only 12 percent saying Japan had "every reason" to back the war.
 British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown on Tuesday named the current head of the country's energy regulator as the new chairman of finance watchdog the Financial Services Authority (FSA)
Former senior banker Callum McCarthy begins what is one of the most important jobs in London's financial world in September, when incumbent Howard Davies steps down.
Davies is leaving to become chairman of the London School of Economics, one of the best-known parts of the University of London.
Brown said McCarthy would bring to the FSA "an unrivalled combination of experience of the public sector, experience as a senior practitioner in the financial services industry, and chairman of a highly successful regulator."
McCarthy currently heads the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, or Ofgem, which regulates Britain's privatised energy industry.
As well as previously holding senior positions at Barclays Bank, BZW and Kleinwort Benson, McCarthy was formerly a top civil servant at the Department of Trade and Industry.
Under Davies's watch, the FSA became Britain's sole regulatory body for financial services in November 2001, taking on the various functions of nine separate agencies.
At least three members of a family in Indias northeastern state of Tripura were hacked to death by a tribal mob for allegedly practicing witchcraft, police said Thursday.
A spokesman said a group of 25 to 30 armed men Wednesday attacked a house belonging to a village quack doctor in Tultuli, 60 kilometers (38 miles) south of Tripuras state capital Agartala.
"The mob dragged out three members of a family and (killed) them with machetes and spears before fleeing the area," the spokesman said by telephone from Agartala.
The dead included the quack doctor, 55-year-old Nityalila Naotia, his teenaged son and another member of the family, whom he did not identify.
"It was believed Naotia was a practicing sorcerer and through his black magic he had cast evil spells on villagers, prompting a group within the village to eliminate them," the spokesman said.
Police have arrested four people in connection with the killings.
Superstitious beliefs, black magic and demonology are integral to the tribal custom in parts of Tripura and other northeast Indian states.
Many tribes practice faiths believed to be a mix of black magic and superstition.
A Pakistani court in central Punjab province has sentenced a Christian man to life imprisonment for a blasphemy conviction, police said Sunday.
Judge Shahid Rafiq, of the district court in the industrial city of Faisalabad, found Ranjha Masih guilty of defiling Koranic verses during a protest rally by the minority Christian community in 1998.
In a verdict handed down on Saturday, the judge also ordered Ranjha to pay a fine of 50,000 rupees (about 870 US dollars), they said.
Ranjha was accused of tearing down a billboard carrying verses from the Koran in Faisalabad during a Christian demonstration after the city's bishop committed suicide over the 1985 blasphemy law.
Faisalabad's Catholic Bishop John Joseph, who had been campaigning against the law, shot himself in the head outside a court in Sahiwal district when the judge convicted Christian Ayub Masih under the law in 1998.
Ayub Masih was charged in 1996 with blasphemy for allegedly defending British author Salman Rushdie, whose novel "The Satanic Verses" infuriated radical Mulsim clerics who accused the author of defaming Islam.
The Pakistani supreme court last year aquitted Ayub Masih, who had denied uttering any word against Islam or the Prophet Mohammad.
Blasphemy is punishable by death under the Pakistan Penal Code.
However, no blasphemy convict has ever been executed in the country.
Christian rights activists campaigning against the laws, introduced by late military dictator General Zia-ul Haq, say they are mainly used to persecute Christians or to settle feuds over land.
Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom on Wednesday stressed Qatar's role in the Middle East peace process during talks with his Qatari counterpart Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani in Paris.
Shalom told a joint press conference that the tiny Gulf state's strong relationship with the recently appointed Palestinian prime minister, Mahmud Abbas, could be a boost for peace.
"We discussed the Middle East peace process.
Over an hour of talks, we asserted the will of both parties (Israel and the Arab world) to do everything to return to the negotiating table," Shalom said.
"Qatar is a very important country on this issue.
I know the special relationship that the Qatari foreign minister has with Abu Mazen," he said, using Abbas's alternative name.
The meeting was Shalom's first encounter with an Arab counterpart since he took office as Israel's foreign minister on February 27.
Qatar has economic links with Israel without maintaining diplomatic relations, in the face of criticism from other Arab countries.
Afterwards Shalom was to fly on to London for talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw.
US President George W. Bush told Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien by telephone Monday that he looked forward to seeing him at the upcoming summit of major industrialized nations and Russia, the White House said Tuesday.
"The two leaders discussed the upcoming G-8 meeting, US-Canada (relations) and other international issues of concern," Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said days before the June 1-3 summit, to be held in France.
"Both said they look forward to seeing each other in Evian.
They also touched on Afghanistan, the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on the global economy," said Fleischer.
Amid a chill in relations over the war in Iraq, which Canada opposed, Bush indefinitely postponed a visit to Canada, instead choosing to host Australian Prime Minster John Howard, who endorsed that military campaign.
On Monday, Chretien told reporters that he and Bush, who had not spoken since late February, discussed a wide range of issues, including Iraq, the upcoming summit of the Group of Eight industrial powers and aid to Africa.
"We've always been on good terms.
A provincial chief from India’s main opposition congress party has told an election rally that India is suffering nature’s "curse" because both the president and prime minister and bachelors, a report said Saturday.
We just disagree on one item," the Canadian leader said.
The Times of India newspaper quoted Digvijay Singh, chief minister of the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, as saying that Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee and President Abdul Kalam had off ended the Hindu rain God Varuna by remaining bachelors.
"The country is being ruled by a bachelor president and an unmarried prime minister.
"Not just Prime Minister Vajpayee but president Kalam’s bachelor status is making the country dry, arid and infertile," he added.
The general secretary of Vajpayee’s ruling Bharatiya Janata party, pramod Mahajan, retorted that Singh’s statement was "beneath contempt."
India’s has been reeling under a heat wave since mid-may which has killed 1,403 people.
This according to the Hindu shastras (books) is very inauspicious and that is the reason there is a widespread heat wave and drought, "said Singh.
The skeleton of a second baby has been found at a rural Wisconsin home where a 22-year-old woman's dead infant was discovered in a blue plastic container June 8, officials said Monday.
The country’s western desert state of Rajasthan is also bracing for its fifth straight year of drought.
Kristin Scott, the mother, told police she gave birth secretly to both babies at her parents' home in Byrds Creek, Richland County, one of unknown sex in April 2001 and the other, a fullterm girl, January 14.
Police arrested her in Abilene, Texas, Saturday where she had moved with a friend June 2.
She is being held on 50,000 dollars bail on a charge of first-degree reckless homicide and hiding a corpse in the death of the infant born in January.
Scott told police she did not tend to the baby, and it died after 30 minutes.
She said the baby had to die, according to the criminal complaint.
The woman's parents, William and Nancy Scott, found the decomposing body of the first baby in her closet after they went looking for the source of a foul odor in their house.
Scott told investigators she had moved that body around before she moved to Texas, sometimes in the closet at the Byrds Creek house, in the trunk of her car and in the closet of her apartment in Richland Center, the complaint said.
The sheriff released no other details about the second baby.
Palestinian security forces returned Monday to the positions they held in the Gaza Strip before the outbreak of the 33-month Palestinian uprising as Israel removed all major checkpoints in the coastal territory, a Palestinian security source said.
Police officers took up their positions across the Gaza Strip, enjoying a freedom of movement they have not known since the intifada exploded in September 2000, the source said.
"Palestinian police have taken over all the posts and positions they held before September 28, 2000.
It is the first time they have had freedom of movement with cars and weapons since the start of the intifada," the source said.
The move marked a huge step forward in carrying out the US-backed Middle East "roadmap", which aims to end the months of bloodshed and create a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
Following the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the northern town of Beit Hanoun late Sunday, police took up positions there and in the neighbouring town of Beit Lahiya, he said.
They also deployed along the border with Israel.
The handover is a credibility test for the Palestinian Authority, which must show it means business when it comes to reining in hardline groups plotting attacks on the Jewish state.
In another first in the almost three-year intifada, the Israeli army allowed Palestinians free circulation on the trans-Gaza highway as troops abandoned three major checkpoints across the coastal territory.
Traffic was flowing freely through the Netzarim junction, just south of Gaza City, the Kissufim junction by Deir al-Balah in the central Gaza Strip, and the Guest House junction just south of Deir al-Balah after the army withdrew.
The three military checkpoints on the highway, which runs the entire length of the Gaza Strip, had transformed the trip from north to south, ordinarily a 30-minute ride, into a grinding two or three-hour ordeal and came to symbolise the horrors of occupation.
"Israel has implemented most of the agreement except for a few issues," the source said, pointing out that Israel had still not removed two military observation posts at the Kissufim junction and the Guest House junction.
Although there was free movement along the trans-Gaza highway, several other roads remained temporarily closed, he said.
The Karni-Netzarim road, which runs east-to-west across the route, was still closed as was the section of the highway passing close by Kfar Darom settlement, just south of the Guest House junction, he said, adding both were likely to be opened in the coming weeks.
Another road, leading from the southern border town of Rafah to Khan Yunis, would be opened within 10 days, he said.
Adressing Palestinian complaints, an Israeli military source confirmed troops had installed a gate at the Netzarim crossing and at the southern Guest House junction but said that they were only there for when Jewish settlers needed to use the road.
A ban on Palestinian men under the age of 35 being allowed to move freely was still in force but that was expected to be lifted later on Monday or early Tuesday.
The army also handed over control of Rafah border crossing between the Gaza Strip and Egypt to the Palestinians, security sources said.
Six Palestinian police officers were allowed to return to the Palestinian section of the border crossing, which had been taken over by Israeli troops shortly after the start of the uprising.
Under the 1993 Oslo accords, which granted a measure of autonomy to the Palestinians, the Rafah border crossing with Egypt was to be jointly managed by both Israel and the Palestinians, although Israel had final control over the zone.
Although the crossing has, in principle, been open for movement between the two territories -- while being frequently closed by Israeli for reasons rarely explained -- the Palestinian section has been manned by Israel for more than two years.
I wish I could have been at a Pub, or wherever these people convene, to see the reactions from all the Britons who read the Telegraph this morning (emphasis added): Britain's gun laws are aimed at the wrong target, curbing and criminalising legal ownership while failing to tackle huge rises in shooting offences over the past few years, according to an international firearms legislation expert.
Prof Gary Mauser said that Britain was making the same mistake as Canada and Australia in focusing on legal owners - a section of the law-abiding community where gun crimes, such as the Dunblane massacre, were aberrations.
The Home Office and police chiefs should instead tackle the possession of guns in criminal hands, said Prof Mauser, a member of the independent Fraser Institute in Canada.
He has given evidence to select committees of the House of Commons and the Canadian Senate and predicted the escalation of gun crime on Britain's streets.
His warning comes as gun crime incidents are averaging about 29 a day in England and Wales, more than twice the level of when the Labour Government came to power in 1997 .
In the past two years, there have been cases of schoolchildren and a baby, killed or injured by guns.
"I believe that factors of political correctness are at work," he said.
"Police crackdowns, Home Office initiatives and over-regulation of legally held weapons create froth and they may even fool the police themselves into believing they are doing something about gun crime."
Prof Mauser added: "The sad truth is that while the police officers are inspecting farmers' gun cabinets to see if they comply with regulations somewhere in the UK, someone, who has not filled in a firearms certificate form, will be smuggling a gun into the country or selling one to an inner city youth."
Recorded gun crime rose by three per cent to 10,590 incidents in the year to June.
Two-thirds of gun crime takes place in London, Birmingham and Manchester.
It doesn't matter to these people that crime has skyrocketed since the irrational ban on private gun possession went into effect in Great Britain.
Just as long as it's there, they feel safe.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld took part in a Q&A with the troops today that was anything but cozy.
Disgruntled soldiers complained to Rumsfeld about long deployments and a lack of armored vehicles and other equipment.
From the Associated Press : "You go to war with the Army you have," Rumsfeld replied, "not the Army you might want or wish to have."
Spc. Thomas Wilson had asked the defense secretary, "Why do we soldiers have to dig through local landfills for pieces of scrap metal and compromised ballistic glass to up-armor our vehicles?"
Shouts of approval and applause arose from the estimated 2,300 soldiers who had assembled to see Rumsfeld.
"We do not have proper armored vehicles to carry with us north," Wilson, 31, of Nashville, Tenn., concluded after asking again.
Wilson, an airplane mechanic whose unit, the 278th Regimental Combat Team of the Tennessee Army National Guard, is about to drive north into Iraq for a one-year tour of duty, put his finger on a problem that has bedeviled the Pentagon for more than a year.
Rarely, though, is it put so bluntly in a public forum.
Rumsfeld said the Army was sparing no expense or effort to acquire as many Humvees and other vehicles with extra armor as it can.
What is more, he said, armor is not the savior some think it is.
"You can have all the armor in the world on a tank and a tank can (still) be blown up," he said.
Can't say that's the most comforting answer.
From the Associated Press : City residents will vote next year on a proposed weapons ban that would deny handguns to everyone except law enforcement officers, members of the military and security guards.
If passed next November, residents would have 90 days to give up firearms they keep in their homes or businesses.
The proposal was immediately dismissed as illegal by a gun owners group.
Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else "actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment," according to the measure.
Gun Owners of California, a Sacramento-based lobbying group, quickly called the ban illegal.
Sam Paredes, the group's executive director, said state law bars local governments from usurping the state's authority to regulate firearms.
"The amazing thing is they are going to turn San Francisco into ground zero for every criminal who wants to profit at their chosen profession," Paredes said.
Washington, D.C., is the only major American city that currently bans handgun possession by private citizens.
Andrew Arulanandam, director of public affairs for the National Rifle Association, said San Francisco would be remiss to use that city as a model.
"If gun control worked, Washington, D.C., would be the beacon.
However, it's the murder capital of the United States," he said.
If approved, the weapons ban would take effect in January 2006.
Quote of the day: "Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment."
So preserving property or life within the scope of self-defense and protection of the home is not allowed.
No thanks.
If the people vote for this measure it will be hard to sympathize with them when robbery and rape rates skyrocket, because burgulars will know homes are not guarded, and rapists will know the only thing stopping them from the victim they desire is their own inhibitions.
From the Associated Press : A baby girl who had been cut out of her mother's womb was found after a frantic search, and authorities arrested the woman they say strangled the mother and stole the child.
The baby was in good condition Saturday.
Lisa M. Montgomery, 36, of Melvern, Kan., was arrested later Friday and charged with kidnapping resulting in death.
Bobbie Jo Stinnett, 23, was found Thursday in a pool of blood inside her small white home in Skidmore, a town in northwest Missouri.
Stinnett, who was eight months pregnant, had earlier been talking with her mother on the phone, and hung up saying a woman she had chatted with online had just arrived at her door, authorities said.
U.S. Attorney Todd Graves said Montgomery contacted Stinnett through an online message board, and authorities zeroed in on her using computer forensics.
Montgomery was seeking to buy a dog from Stinnett, who raised rat terriers, he said.
According to the criminal complaint, Montgomery traveled about 40 miles to Topeka, Kan., on Thursday to go shopping.
Her husband received a call from her saying she had gone into labor and given birth.
The next day, authorities say, Montgomery confessed that she strangled Stinnett from behind, cut her open, removed the baby and cut her umbilical cord.
I don't understand how we can call this fetus-thing that was ripped from a mother's womb a "child" or "girl" in a society that sanctions partial-birth abortion.
If you can't charge someone for killing a fetus via abortion during the eighth month, then surely you can't make a big deal about a woman who kidnapped a fetus that survived the knifing.
On a less-sarcastic note, I pray for the family of the 23-year-old woman.
No one should have to die because some crazy nut wanted a child and decided to kill for it.
If there's any good news in this story, it's that Victoria Jo will live on and carry her mother's memory.
Question for the pro-choicers: Being that it isn't yet the ninth month, can we still charge the killer with kidnapping?
Feminists have a reason to celebrate today as an appeals court just threw out the convictions of their martyr, Andrea Yates, by ruling that one of the prosecutor's expert witnesses gave false testimony at her trial.
Yates, in case you have forgotten, is the women from Texas who heinously drowned her five kids, aged 6 months to 7 years, one by one, in her bathtub.
Liberal feminist organizations rushed to Yates' defense, most notably the National Organization for Women, which provided money for her defense fund and held candlelight vigils.
No such ceremonies were held for her five dead children.
In 2002 a jury sentenced Yates to life in prison for the deaths of three of her children.
She was not tried in the deaths of the other two.
Today the 1st Court of Appeals overturned the convictions and ordered a new trial.
We can only hope for the same verdict.
The blood red nation of China is trying to curb the effects of a devastating 20-year-old policy that outlawed women from having more than one child.
As a result, only about 100 girls are born for every 119 boys, because couples traditionally favor males.
Beijing has set a goal of reversing the imbalance by 2010, and to do this they will outlaw the selective abortion of female fetuses to correct an imbalance in the ratio of boys to girls.
So now by killing the males they can hopefully narrow the gender gap.
What a country!
From Reuters : Sex-selective abortion is already banned but technologies such as ultrasound have made it easier to know a baby's gender in advance, increasing the chances for aborting girls.
Despite a desire to curb the sex imbalance and a relaxation in recent years that allows rural families to have two children if the first is a girl, China has shown no sign of abandoning the one-child policy and cracks down on those who advocate against it.
One such activist is Mao Hengfeng, who was dismissed in 1988 from her job at a Shanghai soap factory after becoming pregnant a second time.
Last April, the Shanghai public security bureau sentenced her to 18 months in a labor camp for campaigning against the one-child policy.
In other news: feminists still believe they're second-class citizens in the United States.
A CNN poll asks readers to rate the president's State of the Union speech last night.
After 90,000 votes Mr. Bush has a 'C-C+' grade across the board, meaning 45,000 Republicans gave him an 'A' and 45,000 liberals failed him.
But a new CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll suggests more people side with the president.
70 percent of respondents said Bush's policies on health care were positive, while 66 percent approved of the president's plan for Social Security.
78 percent said U.S. policy in Iraq is hading in the right direction, a 12 percentage point increase over pre-speech polling.
Overall, 77 percent of respondents said Bush is taking the country in the right direction after the speech compared to 67 percent beforehand.
And who wasn't moved by the embrace of mother of a soldier killed in Iraq and the daughter of a man killed by Saddam Hussein's regime?
It was a beautiful moment last night that resulted in the longest standing ovation of the evening.
Today the parents of Marine Corps Sgt. Byron Norwood said the Iraqi woman, Safia Taleb al-Suhail, had turned and introduced herself just before the speech.
"She thanked us for our son's sacrifice and made sure we knew the people in Iraq were grateful for the sacrifices that were made not just by our son, but by all of them," Janet Norwood said.
It was an uplifting moment suggesting that maybe we're doing the right thing.
I talked to a friend currently serving in Iraq last night and he says morale is up and the presence of troops is a positive thing.
They just can't pack up and leave.
Not just yet.
We must be patient.
We've all lived next to some pretty undesirable people at one point or another, but I can't imagine anyone being worse than this.
A Colorado judge ordered two teen-age girls to pay about $900 for the distress a neighbor said they caused by giving her home-made cookies adorned with paper hearts.
The pair were ordered to pay $871.70 plus $39 in court costs after neighbor Wanita Renea Young, 49, filed a lawsuit complaining that the unsolicited cookies, left at her house after the girls knocked on her door, had triggered an anxiety attack that sent her to the hospital the next day.
Taylor Ostergaard, then 17, and Lindsey Jo Zellitte, 18, paid the judgment on Thursday after a small claims court ruling by La Plata County Court Judge Doug Walker, a court clerk said on Friday.
The girls baked cookies as a surprise for several of their rural Colorado neighbors on July 31 and dropped off small batches on their porches, accompanied by red or pink paper hearts and the message: "Have a great night."
The Denver Post newspaper reported on Friday that the girls had decided to stay home and bake the cookies rather than go to a dance where there might be cursing and drinking.
Zebra Report has a picture of the good-intentioned girls.
Maybe delinquency does pay off better.
From the Associated Press : A lone gunman opened fire with an assault rifle Sunday inside a crowded mall in upstate New York, wounding one person before running out of ammunition and being subdued by employees, authorities said.
The gunman began shooting inside the Hudson Valley Mall shortly after 3 p.m. in Kingston, nearly 90 miles north of New York City.
The 24-year-old gunman went into a Best Buy store and started firing.
When he ran out of ammunition, he was captured by mall employees, police said.
Ulster Town Supervisor Fred Wadnola identified the gunman's weapon as an AK-47 assault rifle.
"Everyone was running and screaming.
Then I heard the shots," witness Heather Craig told Fox News.
Whoa!
You're telling me someone was able to take an AK-47 "assault rifle" into a mall and injure people?!
But it's New York.
They have gun laws!
And because New York has such strict gun laws - meaning citizens are prohibited from concealing weapons - a gunner can use bag-toting shoppers as target practice because guns laws keep mall shoppers at his mercy.
Had an armed civilian been inside the mall, perhaps he could have intervened before the suspect began injuring people before he ran out of ammo.
But not in New York.
Because there people like me who have never had so much as a traffic ticket in life cannot conceal weapons, unlike in Florida, where you walk past us everyday without even knowing it.
From the St. Pete Times : Some Florida legislators want to give people the right to shoot an attacker in a public place.
A House committee voted Wednesday to allow people to shoot to kill in self-defense if they are attacked "in any other place where he or she has a right to be."
Sponsored by Rep. Dennis Baxley, an Ocala Republican, the bill (HB 249) passed 13-0.
State law defines deadly force as that which is likely to cause "death or great bodily harm," such as firing a gun at a person or a vehicle.
Florida courts consider deadly force a last resort and have held that a person being attacked has the "duty to use every reasonable means to avoid the danger, including retreat, prior to using deadly force."
But this legislation says a person who is under attack in a public place "has no duty to retreat."
"Law-abiding people should not be told that if they are attacked, they should turn around and run," NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer told lawmakers.
"This bill gives back rights that have been eroded and taken away by a judicial system that at times appears to give preferential treatment to criminals."
Baxley held up a stack of more than 800 e-mails from Floridians who he said have written him to support the bill.
He said 62 House members, a majority, have endorsed his bill, and supporters include Attorney General Charlie Crist and groups representing Florida sheriffs, police chiefs and police officers.
Rep. Jeff Kottkamp, R-Cape Coral, said the bill reminded him of a sign he saw on a constituent's house while campaigning door-to-door.
Kottkamp said the sign, next to a doorbell, showed a smoking .44-Magnum handgun and the words: "We don't dial 911."
This is great news for Florida gun carriers because now to defend yourself you don't have to first make sure a "duty to retreat" is impossible.
Currently, if one's life is threatened he/she must make sure it is impossible to escape before using deadly force on an attacker.
Slobodan Milosevic's wife will go on trial next week on charges of mismanaging state property during the former president's rule, a court said Thursday.
Mirjana Markovic, the power behind the scenes during Milosevic's 13-year reign, is accused of illegally providing their grandson's nanny with a state-owned luxury apartment in Belgrade in 2000.
The Belgrade district court said that Markovic will be tried along with 10 other Milosevic-era officials who face similar charges of ``inappropriate use of state property'' that carry a sentence of up to five years in jail.
The trial will start on March 13, the court said.
Milosevic and his wife wielded enormous power in Yugoslavia for more than a decade before he was swept out of power after a popular revolt in October 2000.
The post-Milosevic government later extradited him to the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague, the Netherlands.
Since then, many of Milosevic's political and business allies as well as his two children have been accused of crimes.
Markovic, the leader of the neo-communist Yugoslav Left party, lost her parliamentary immunity from prosecution after she failed to become a deputy in the parliament of Serbia and Montenegro, the country that last month succeeded Yugoslavia.
The charismatic leader of Turkey's governing party was named prime minister Tuesday, a step that probably boosts chances that the United States will get permission to deploy troops in the country along Iraq's northern border.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who favors the deployment, hinted that he will reshuffle the Cabinet, but gave no indication if he would purge officials who opposed letting in the troops as analysts have suggested he might do.
Erdogan is extremely popular in Turkey and is likely be one of the few leaders with enough clout to unite his party and gain public support for allowing in the U.S. troops.
Turks overwhelmingly oppose a war -- by 94 percent, according to some polls.
Earlier this month, the Turkish parliament shocked the United States by rejecting the deployment by just four votes.
Erdogan has hinted that he will resubmit the resolution for approval, which could take another week.
The United States is pressing Turkey to act quickly.
Ships carrying equipment for U.S. troops are already waiting off the Turkish coast.
In Washington, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Richard Myers told a Pentagon news conference Tuesday that the United States would ``have a northern option whether or not Turkey fully supports all our requests.
``I'm not going to talk about the operational ways of doing it, but just be assured there will be a northern option,'' he said.
Also in Washington, Turkish Ambassador Farouk Logoglu told The Associated Press that the U.S. and Turkish militaries were holding informal discussions on the use of Turkish airspace.
The troop-basing resolution would allow the United States to use Turkish airspace.
If the resolution is not passed, Washington would likely want to use the airspace for strikes against Iraq and for airlifting troops to northern Iraq.
Refusing access to the troop deployment would mean Turkey would lose a US$15 billion U.S. aid package that Washington has offered to help cushion the country's economy if there is war.
It would also threaten Turkey's possible role in the future of Iraq.
Turkey, which fears northern Iraqi Kurds may declare independence in the aftermath of a war, has been pressing for a say if Saddam Hussein is ousted.
Secession by Iraqi Kurds could inspire Turkey's rebel Kurds, who for 15 years have been fighting for autonomy.
After he was elected, Erdogan said Turkey wanted assurances from the United States on its role in Iraq.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Tuesday there had been talks that Turkish troops could be deployed ``a short distance from their border to try to avoid refugee infiltration.''
Iraqi Kurds fear that Turkish troops could move deep into the autonomous enclave in northern Iraq and have threatened clashes.
Rumsfeld also said that like Turkey, the United States doesn't want to see a breakaway state: ``Our interest, needless to say, is to see that Iraq remains a single country,'' he said at the Pentagon news conference.
Prime Minister Abdullah Gul resigned earlier Tuesday to make way for Erdogan, who won a parliamentary seat in by-elections Sunday.
Gul will remain as a caretaker prime minister until President Ahmet Necdet Sezer approves Erdogan's Cabinet, a move that could happen as early as Wednesday.
Erdogan said he would submit his Cabinet list to the president ``as soon as possible,'' and leaders of Erdogan's Justice and Development Party met Tuesday evening.
When asked about possible changes in the Cabinet, Erdogan said: ``Perhaps there will be a small amount of change, a certain number of revisions.''
Gul's resignation had been long expected.
Erdogan heads the party but was constitutionally barred from running in November elections because he was jailed in 1999 for anti-secular activities.
The Justice party changed the constitution after taking power in the elections.
Erdogan, a leader of Turkey's pro-Islamic movement when he was jailed, said he moderated his policies in prison.
His party considers itself conservative and no longer uses the word 'Islamic' in its literature.
He now also advocates letting in U.S. troops for a war against Iraq even though it is a fellow Muslim state.
Unlike the soft-spoken Gul, Erdogan has a reputation as a fighter.
``Erdogan will be willing to engage in a bruising confrontation in a way that Gul was not willing to,'' said Bulent Aliriza, an analyst at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.
``If Erdogan decides that for his own reasons, and not U.S. pressure, he wants this, he will push it through.''
Tensions over the basing agreement spilled over into parliament Tuesday when opposition deputy Ufuk Ozkan shouted ``You are all American lackeys!'' at members of Erdogan's party, the Anatolia news agency reported.
A furious Justice party member, Fehmi Husrev Kutlu, rushed toward Ozkan, bumping into him and sending his eyeglasses flying, Anatolia reported.
Other legislators surrounded the two to head off a brawl.
U.S. and British troops were moving on the strategic southern port city of Basra Saturday after a massive aerial assault pounded Baghdad at dawn.
Thousands of beleaguered Iraqi soldiers in the south surrendered in the face of the major push.
The battle for Basra, an oil hub of some 1.3 million people, was underway by midday, with coalition troops trying to surround Iraqi positions and force a surrender.
U.S. aircraft bombed Iraqi tanks holding bridges close to the city.
Iraqi forces responded with artillery fire.
Earlier Saturday, Baghdad was again targeted, one day after a massive U.S. aerial bombardment in which more than 300 Tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on the capital.
The nine-story Security Headquarters in the Iraqi capital took a direct hit, strewing bricks, masonry and glass across the street in the al-Salhiya neighborhood of central Baghdad.
As coalition troops advanced, an entire Iraqi army division gave itself up, U.S. military officials said.
The division -- the 51st Infantry Division, with 8,000 men and as many as 200 tanks, a key unit in the defense of Basra -- was the largest defection in a day when Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's forces showed signs of crumbling.
Allied successes were marred by the collision of two Royal Navy helicopters over the Persian Gulf in which all six British crew members and one American were killed.
Saturday morning, American Marines and British troops rumbled along the main road from the Kuwaiti border to Basra, Highway 80, nicknamed the ``Highway of Death'' during the 1991 Gulf War, when U.S. airstrikes wiped out an Iraqi military convoy along it.
American units advancing west of Basra have already secured the Rumeila oil field, whose daily output of 1.3 million barrels makes it Iraq's most productive.
Until Basra, U.S. and British troops had encountered little resistance, even when they seized nearby Umm Qasr, and moved to secure key oil fields.
Iraqis mostly fought back with small arms, pistols, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
Regular Iraqi forces had withdrawn from Basra but elements of Saddam's security forces are continuing to resist, British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon said Saturday.
Other units moved into airfield complexes in western Iraq believed to have Scud missiles capable of reaching Israel, and possibly weapons of mass destruction.
Early Saturday, more units were waiting in Kuwait to smash through any Iraqi resistance.
Hundreds of tanks, armored personnel carriers, Humvees and trucks were lined up in parallel columns waiting in single-file to cross the Iraqi-Kuwait border.
By early next week, U.S. ground forces led by the Army's 3rd Infantry Division are likely to be at the outskirts of Baghdad, where they could face greater danger from the Republican Guard, some commanders said.
After weeks of delay, Turkey relented and agreed to let combat aircraft fly over its territory.
At the same time, however, Turkey sent 1,000 troops into northern Iraq, and the government said it would send more to prevent Iraqi Kurds from creating an independent state.
The United States strongly opposes any unilateral move by Turkey into northern Iraq.
A Turkish military spokesman on Saturday denied Turkish troops had crossed into Iraq.
The United States and Britain suffered their first casualties Thursday and Friday as they pushed into Iraq, with two U.S. Marines killed in combat and another eight British and four American Marines dying in a helicopter crash that appeared to be accidental.
There was no clear figure of Iraqi casualties.
Australian commandos, who have been operating deep in Iraq, destroyed a command and control post and killed a number of soldiers, according to the country's defense chief, Gen. Peter Cosgrove.
In an address Saturday, Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf told Iraqis that fighting had been ``fierce.''
He said most of those captured by allied forces were civilians, not soldiers.
He claimed Iraqi troops had destroyed five tanks.
He said more than 200 Iraqis had been injured, including women, children and other civilians who were being treated at five hospitals in Baghdad.
Hoon said Saddam's regime was crumbling under the pressure of a huge air assault.
``As last night's dramatic television coverage showed, the lights stayed on in Baghdad, but the instruments of tyranny are collapsing,'' he said.
Iraqi Vice President Taha Yasin Ramadan, speaking on Iraqi Radio, was quoted by the British Broadcasting Corp.'s monitoring service as accusing Britain and the United States of working to ``eliminate'' the state of Iraq.
In a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Ramadan said, ``It is also regrettable and deplorable that the (U.N.) General Secretariat has not issued any statement or reaction that condemns or deplores this aggression.''
Despite the heavy bombing, which the U.S. Central Command said targeted military command and control installations, the Iraqi regime gave no sign of quitting.
Bombers have also hit targets in the northern cities of Mosul, Kirkuk and Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
The Iraqi government released a video of Saddam, in uniform, meeting with his son Qusai, the commander of the Republican Guard, and the defense minister, Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmad.
It was unclear when the video was made.
U.S. intelligence officials said the Iraqi command and control system was in disarray, and U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said, ``The regime is starting to lose control of their country.''
Kurdish militiamen and U.S. special operations troops linked up with more than 1,000 U.S. Army paratroopers Thursday to secure the area around a strategic air strip, as the first large coalition ground force in northern Iraq began opening another front against Saddam Hussein's regime.
The Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade , including elite Army Rangers, jumped out of low-flying C-17 transport planes under cover of darkness Wednesday and secured a snow-dusted airfield, which will be used to bring in supplies and support personnel.
The airdrop -- one of the biggest paratroop drops in decades -- was a dramatic entry for ground troops into a region where only small groups of U.S. special forces have been operating.
Coalition airstrikes have been hitting Iraqi military forces and other strategic targets in the north.
``This tightens the noose against Saddam's forces battling coalition forces to the south,'' Brig. Gen. James Parker, commander of U.S. forces in the north.
``And it may also serve as a warning to Turkish forces.''
Giving cover for the deployment, U.S. warplanes struck Iraqi ground troops and bunkers in northern Iraq.
Three waves of combat planes from the aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt hit ``ground troops, command and control bunkers, artillery positions and ... a surface to air missile battery,'' said Lt. John Oliveira, the ship's public affair officer.
Around dawn Thursday, strikes resumed, with a massive explosion just outside the Kurdish zone close to the village of Kalak.
Warplanes pounded forward Iraqi positions in the hills overlooking Chamchamal, 35 kilometers (22 miles) east of the key oil city of Kirkuk.
Later Thursday, Kurdish troops in Chamchamal advanced their positions between government-controlled and rebel-controlled areas, taking over a Iraqi check point on their front with no fighting at this point, witnesses said.
Early Thursday, Kurdish fighters closed off a highway and roads near the airstrip where troops were said to be arriving, outside the town of Bashur, about 30 miles (50 kilometers) northeast of the Kurd-controlled city of Irbil and 30 miles (50 kilometers) south of the Turkish border.
From the highway, dusted from a recent snow, a flashing light from the airstrip's control tower was visible in the distance, and three helicopters could be seen landing, flying with nearly all their lights extinguished.
Future airlifts into the area will include supplies and support personnel for the 173rd's fighters, defense officials said.
The airfield's 6,700-foot (2,042-meter) runway is long enough to land C-17s and other U.S. military cargo planes.
Lt. Col. Thomas Collins, a spokesman for the U.S. Army's Southern European Task Force, refused to say whether the paratroopers deployed directly from Italy into Iraq or had taken a different route.
The matter immediately sparked controversy in Italy, where there is a strong anti-war movement.
The country's parliament voted this month to allow U.S.-led coalition forces to use Italian air space and military bases -- but not for directs attacks on Iraq.
Pentagon officials have said for weeks they would have U.S. forces in northern Iraq to open another front against Saddam's forces.
The vast majority of the coalition ground troops in Iraq are moving toward Baghdad from the south after entering from Kuwait.
Pentagon officials had hoped to have the Army's 4th Infantry Division invade Iraq from the north, but Turkey balked at allowing up to 62,000 U.S. troops on its soil to prepare for that option.
The use of the 173rd shows the military has shifted to a smaller, lighter force.
Military officials say they would have liked to have secured key oil fields around the northern cities of Mosul and Kirkuk -- and perhaps the cities themselves -- by now.
Though no hostilities were expected during the deployment, the 173rd decided to parachute in rather then ferry troops in by plane so that a significant combat force could mass almost immediately to protect itself, officers said, according to a U.S. reporter traveling with the 173rd.
``Kirkuk is key.
The Iraqi's want it, the Kurds want it, the Turks want it and various other ethnic groups also want it,'' Maj. Mike Hastings said.
``What this drop means is that we can secure it until we are relieved by other forces.''
Besides Mosul and Kirkuk, another key target in northern Iraq is Tikrit, Saddam's hometown and the tribal center for most of his inner circle.
Most of the Adnan Division of the Republican Guard relocated from the Mosul area to the Tikrit area shortly before the war began.
Another key mission for the 173rd could be to keep order in northern Iraq, which is controlled by two semi-autonomous Kurdish factions but also includes several splinter groups and a base for the al-Qaida-linked Ansar al-Islam.
Turkey has said it may send more troops into northern Iraq to prevent refugees from moving north, while U.S. officials have said they advised Turkey against sending large additional forces into northern Iraq.
Former Danish international Stig Toefting dropped his appeal of an assault conviction and will serve a four-month jail sentence, Denmark's TV2 reported Monday.
Toefting was convicted in October 2002 of assaulting a pair of restaurant workers during a night out with national squad teammates in the capital, Copenhagen.
He was sentenced to four months in prison, but appealed.
The hearing was scheduled for April 10.
TV2, quoting Toefting's lawyer Anders Nemeth, reported that that 33-year-old midfielder was ready to serve his sentence immediately.
Neither Toefting or Nemeth were immediately available for comment.
Earlier this month, Toefting said English Premier League club Bolton let him go so he could prepare for the appeal.
It was unclear whether Toefting would return to Bolton after serving his sentence.
The club said it wasn't aware of Toefting's decision to drop his appeal.
Toefting transferred to Bolton in February 2002 from German club Hamburg.
Toefting has been convicted before.
In 1999 he was given a 20-day suspended sentence for assaulting a fan who berated him for playing with German club Duisburg.
The popular player -- known for his temperament and the words ``No Regret'' tattooed across his chest -- retired from Denmark's national team after it was knocked out in the second round of the 2002 World Cup.
Toefting joined the Danish squad in 1993 and has 41 caps.
U.S. soldiers moved to capture Baghdad's Saddam International Airport early Friday and fought running battles with Iraqi defenders along the city's southern fringes.
``A vise is closing on the regime,'' U.S. President George W. Bush said.
Some frontline units went on heightened alert against the threat of chemical weapons, ordered to wear rubber boots and suits despite temperatures that soared into the 90s.
There was fierce fighting in Kut, to the south of Baghdad, where desperate Iraqis armed with rifles charged tanks in a suicide raid.
``We mowed down'' the attackers, said Lt. Col. B.P. McCoy.
Despite declarations that more tough fighting lies ahead, the top U.S. military official indicated there may not be an all-out battle for Baghdad.
Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, suggested isolating members of the old regime in the capital -- cut off from the rest of the country -- while an ``interim administration'' is put in place to begin work on a postwar government.
A meeting to organize an interim government could be held in Iraq within a week, a senior Pentagon official said Thursday night.
For the first time in the war, large parts of Baghdad lost electricity.
The cause was not known.
Myers told reporters at a Pentagon briefing that Americans had not targeted the power grid.
Tracer rounds lit the night sky and artillery boomed near the airport a few kilometers (miles) from the heart of President Saddam Hussein's capital of 5 million people.
At one stage, it appeared that U.S. forces had taken control of the airport, ``and then it got more confusing with continued fighting, Myers said Thursday night.
Capture of the airport would give American and British troops a facility for airlifting equipment and troops to Baghdad.
Along the city's southern edge, U.S. tanks and Bradley vehicles destroyed at least seven Iraqi armored personnel carriers and more than 15 Iraqi tanks in fighting that went on for more than four hours.
Two weeks into the war, American commanders reported a string of successes -- on the battlefield and within an Iraqi population initially reluctant about embracing invading troops.
Kurdish fighters in the north chipped in, when a top leader suggested they may agree not to seek control of the northern city of Kirkuk.
There were battlefield setbacks, as well.
Two Marines were killed and one injured in the close-quarters fighting in Kut.
And an Army soldier investigating a destroyed tank in central Iraq was killed by friendly fire when he was mistaken for an Iraqi, the military said.
U.S. defense officials also were investigating whether a Navy Hornet jet that crashed Wednesday was shot down by a U.S. Patriot missile.
The Navy was searching for the pilot Thursday.
The overall toll of American troops dead passed 50, and Bush visited a Marine camp, which has lost 13 -- more than any other installation.
``He's in heaven,'' the commander in chief told the family of one fallen Marine in a private moment.
To the cheers of thousands earlier in a speech, he vowed victory, and said, ``A vise is closing on the regime.''
Iraqi officials issued the latest in a series of exhortations in Saddam's name.
``Fight them with your hands.
God will disgrace them,'' they said, referring to invading American and British troops.
But the daily urgings seemed increasingly at odds with the military situation across the country, and Myers said Saddam had lost control of 45 percent of Iraq's territory.
As conventional units fought their way to the outskirts of the capital, officials said special forces had raided the Tharthar presidential palace near Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
Documents were seized at the site north of Baghdad, said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks at U.S. Central Command in the Persian Gulf, but no ranking members of the regime were found.
``That's all right, he added, ``there's other operations ongoing.''
To the far north, U.S. special forces and Kurdish militiamen captured the town of Bardarash and a nearby bridge, one of few routes into the city of Mosul near government-held oil fields.
Iraqis had held the town for 13 years.
In the country's southern region, British forces penetrated closer to the center of Basra, and warplanes dropped 500-pound (225-kilogram) and 1,000-pound (450-kilogram) laser-guided bombs on an Iraqi intelligence complex.
Die-hard defenders have held out for days inside the city of 1.3 million.
American officials cited continuing examples of Iraqis cooperating with invading troops.
In Najaf, they said a prominent cleric under house arrest by the Iraqi government had urged the population not to interfere with the operations of American or British forces.
A small group of Iraqi defenders has been holding out inside the city in a mosque, considered a Shiite holy site, and local clerics said one religious leader had recently arrived in hopes of arranging for their safe passage out of the shrine.
Ground forces closed in on Baghdad from separate southern approaches, the Army from the southeast and Marines from the southwest, in advances begun Tuesday night.
American and British helicopters and planes bombed positions in Kut, and Marines and Iraqis lobbed grenades at close quarters.
Between 10 and 15 Iraqis armed only with rifles charged Marine tanks in the suicide charge.
Two U.S. Marines died in the fighting -- and a medic who tried to save one of them sorrowfully buried his resuscitation equipment on the spot.
Army forces rolled past dozens of dead Iraqi soldiers and bombed-out hulks of Iraqi military equipment as they made their way toward Baghdad from the area around Karbala.
Many more Iraqi soldiers surrendered to the overwhelming force of the Americans, and were shuttled to the rear.
At the same time they worried about chemical weapons attacks, Brooks disclosed that a special operations force in the southwestern desert had found a number of bottles ``marked in strange ways.''
He said an investigation was under way.
Toyota Motor Corp. said Tuesday it will promote Akio Toyoda, a grandson of the company's founder who is widely viewed as a candidate to some day head Japan's largest automaker.
Managing director Toyoda, 46, grandson of Kiichiro Toyoda and the eldest son of Toyota honorary chairman Shoichiro Toyoda, will become one of 14 senior managing directors under a streamlined management system set to be introduced after a shareholders' meeting in June, the company said in a statement.
Toyoda, who joined Toyota, based in Toyota city, central Japan, in 1984, spearheaded the automaker's Internet and telematics business -- a technology that puts wireless communications into vehicles.
Considered a candidate for future Toyota president, Toyoda oversees its China business, a critical market for the automaker.
Toyoda has been on the star track for years.
When he joined the board in 2000, he was its youngest member.
Under a reform led by President Fujio Cho, the membership of Toyota's board of directors will be slashed to 27 from 58.
Executive vice presidents will be reduced to seven from nine.
The new system is designed to ``speed up decision-making and operations,'' Toyota spokesman Shigeru Hayakawa said.
Toyota's top posts held by Cho and Chairman Hiroshi Okuda remain unchanged.
Kiichiro Toyoda founded the automaker in 1937, transforming the loom manufacturer started by his father into an automaker.
U.S. forces tightened their grip throughout Baghdad, entering the city for the first time from the north, seizing a military airport and battling snipers and Republican Guard fighters.
Meanwhile, the U.S. military faced sharp criticism over assaults that killed three foreign journalists.
Pentagon officials said Tuesday they didn't know whether Iraqi President Saddam Hussein died in the U.S. airstrike on a Baghdad neighborhood the day before.
The strike destroyed three nearby houses and killed at least two people.
U.S. Marines battled snipers as they fought deeper into the capital from the east.
They seized the Rasheed Airport and captured enough ammunition for an estimated 3,000 troops.
Ominously, they also took a prison where they found U.S. Army uniforms and chemical weapons suits possibly belonging to American POWs.
Some army units routed Iraqi fighters from a Republican Guard headquarters inside the capital.
Others discovered a 12-room complex inside a cave, complete with white marble floors and fluorescent lighting.
Members of the U.S. Army's V Corps opened up a new front by entering Baghdad from the north.
The toll on Iraqi civilians four days after Americans first penetrated the Baghdad outskirts is unknown.
But the World Health Organization said Baghdad's hospitals were running out of supplies to treat the burns, shrapnel wounds and spinal injuries caused by the fighting.
Iraqi officials, however, remained defiant, saying Iraq's forces would never surrender to American forces: ``They will be burnt,'' said Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf.
In central Baghdad, a Reuters cameraman and a cameraman for Spain's Telecinco died when an American tank fired on the Palestine Hotel.
``The incident ... raises questions about the judgment of the advancing U.S. troops who have known all along that this hotel is the main base for almost all foreign journalists in Baghdad,'' Reuters Editor-in-Chief Geert Linnebank said.
Tareq Ayyoub, a journalist with Al-Jazeera, died when a U.S. warplane bombed the Arab-language satellite television's office.
An Abu Dhabi TV office in Baghdad also was hit.
Al-Jazeera categorically denied that its Baghdad bureau had been used by Iraqi forces to fire on U.S. troops.
U.S. Central Command said it fired on the TV office and the hotel after U.S. forces came under ``significant'' fire from those buildings.
Associated Press photographer Jerome Delay said he watched from the top floor of the hotel as American tanks took up positions on the bridge.
``All the shooting was concentrated on the bridge and across the river,'' where U.S. forces were located, he said.
It was not clear whether any Iraqi leader had been killed in the airstrike targeting Saddam in an upscale Baghdad neighborhood.
Iraqi rescue workers pulled two bodies from the rubble but said the toll could be as high as 14.
``I don't know whether he survived,'' U.S President George W. Bush said of Saddam at a joint news conference with British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
``The only thing I know is that he's losing power.''
Iraq's U.N. ambassador, Mohammed Al-Douri, said Tuesday he believes that Saddam is alive, although al-Douri acknowledged he has not communicated with Baghdad.
Bush and Blair sought to minimize their differences over who should govern and rebuild Iraq.
Blair favors a stronger U.N. role than Bush.
``There will be a vital role for the U.N. in the reconstruction of Iraq,'' Blair said.
``But the key is that Iraq in the end will be run by the Iraqi people.''
In northern Iraq, Kurdish forces tightened their ring around Kirkuk on Tuesday, following heavy coalition airstrikes on Iraqi fronts.
Kurdish militia took control of Sekamian plateau, about 10 kilometers (six miles) north of Kirkuk, Kurdish media reported.
The area affords a commanding view of the city and the vast oil fields of Iraq's No. 2 oil region.
The U.S. military said two planes had been lost.
An A-10 ``Warthog'' warplane was shot down near Baghdad, believed to be the first fixed-wing aircraft downed by an Iraqi surface-to-air missile since the war began.
U.S. Central Command said the pilot ejected, was recovered by ground forces and was in good condition.
A U.S. F-15E jet fighter also went down early Monday and a search was under way for its two-man crew, the military announced Tuesday.
Officials did not say whether the plane was shot down or crashed accidentally.
British forces in southern Iraq worked to restore order in the heavily looted streets of Basra, as desperate citizens swarmed water tanker trucks the day after British soldiers claimed Iraq's second largest city.
British forces also began establishing the country's first postwar administration Tuesday, granting a local sheik power to set up an administrative committee representing the groups in the region.
Iraq's U.N. Ambassador Mohammed Al-Douri, the first Iraqi official to concede defeat in the U.S.-led war, met privately with Secretary-General Kofi Annan, but refused to talk about rumors that he was planning to leave New York.
``I am sorry,'' he said.
``No Answer.''
``No comment at all.
This is my last word to you,'' he told hordes of journalists who chased him Thursday at his New York residence and U.N. headquarters seeking comment on his talks with the secretary-general, his future and the war.
Asked who should govern Iraq, Al-Douri said: ``I have nothing to do with that.''
Annan also declined to comment on Thursday's meeting with Al-Douri.
With the fall of Baghdad Wednesday, Al-Douri declared ``the game is over'' and expressed hope that the Iraqi people will now be able to live in peace.
He said he had not been in touch with Baghdad.
Beside meeting with Annan, Al-Douri spent several hours during the late morning and afternoon meeting with ambassadors and diplomats in the Delegate's Lounge.
``I wished him good luck but I don't know what he said to the secretary-general and what will be his next steps,'' said Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa, who talked with Al-Douri before his own meeting with Annan.
In an interview with The Associated Press Wednesday night, Al-Douri said he will continue to work at the United Nations and had no intention of defecting.
``Defecting from who?'' he asked.
``I think the government has already defected.
There is no more Iraqi government to be defected from.''
Annan said early Thursday -- before meeting Al-Douri -- that in talks with the envoy Monday, ``he didn't ask for an asylum or protection ... (and) he didn't ask me for help with his status.''
``We did talk about what happens, depending on the evolution of things on the ground,'' Annan said.
The ambassador had vehemently defended his country for months as the United States and its allies sought U.N. backing for war on Iraq.
Privately, many U.N. diplomats see him as a respectable colleague.
``I sympathize with his need to create a new life for himself,'' said Britain's U.N. Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock.
Al-Douri taught international law at Baghdad University for over 30 years before becoming a diplomat in 1999, first at the United Nations in Geneva and since early 2001 at U.N. headquarters in New York.
He said in the AP interview he would love to return to teaching but for now he plans to remain at the United Nations.
``Things will be crystalized one day,'' he said.
``What I worried about is that things are settled in the country ... so in the future the Iraqi people will live in peace without sanctions, without wars, without suffering.
This is my message.''
Separately, lawyers who claim that Iraq helped plan the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing that killed 168 people asked a judge at a federal court in New York to force Al-Douri to testify in the case and hold the envoy in contempt, saying they worry that he would flee the country.
But U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said Al-Douri still has diplomatic immunity as Iraq's ambassador.
Under U.N. rules, a new Iraqi government would have to ask to represent the country, which the General Assembly would then consider.
``He is still Iraq's ambassador at the United Nations,'' White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said in Washington.
``Legally, that is the way it works at the U.N.''
Larry Klayman, chairman of Judicial Watch, which represent 14 survivors and victims' relatives who have filed a $1.5 billion federal lawsuit against Iraq in Washington, said his organization had served a subpoena on Al-Douri twice, on March 26 and March 28, but said he has not responded.
U.S. District Judge John S. Martin did not immediately rule but scheduled a hearing for next week.
The April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building was the deadliest terrorist strike on American soil at the time.
The suit claims Iraqi officials provided money and training to convicted bomber Timothy McVeigh and conspirator Terry Nichols.
McVeigh was executed in 2001, and Nichols is serving a life sentence.
The dictator Suharto has fallen, the constitution has changed, the media was unshackled, democratic elections held, and East Timor freed.
After Sept. 11, 2001, Indonesia was quick to sign onto U.S. President George W. Bush's global war on terror.
Yet, Washington maintains a 12-year ban on arms sales to the world's most populous Muslim nation with the aim of curbing human rights abuses still happening despite momentous political change.
Frustrated, Jakarta's generals are looking elsewhere to replace antiquated arsenals.
Later this month Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri travels to Moscow to seek the Kremlin's help in modernizing her increasingly obsolete 300,000-member armed forces.
She is also likely to open the way for Russian companies to vie for lucrative deals in the oil and gas sector, long dominated by American and British resource giants.
Although opposite ends of the Earth, Indonesia and Russia have some basic things in common.
Both are geographically sprawling with massive multiethnic populations.
Both are struggling to preserve national unity as they fight separatism and build democracy after the collapse of decades of authoritarian rule.
Both are resource-rich, but face huge economic problems made worse by endemic corruption.
And, currently, both have opposed the U.S.- led war on Iraq.
Indonesia's Foreign Ministry spokesman Marty Natalegawa says Megawati's meeting with Russian President Putin slated for April 21 will touch on the Iraq crisis.
But other diplomats say that issue will serve primarily to bring the two closer together on bottom-line issues such as trade and arms sales.
Analysts worry that Indonesia's military is now so degraded it can no longer control the borders of the far-flung archipelago, allowing for easy infiltration by extremists.
Last year's Bali bombings, which killed 202 people, illustrated the threat of terrorism in Indonesia.
And, broad opposition to the U.S.-led attack on Iraq threatens to lead to a backlash by militant Islamists.
``Nearly everybody in Indonesia sees this Iraq war as completely unnecessary and there is widespread public opposition to U.S. policies,'' said Jusuf Wanadi of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
Close ties between Moscow and Jakarta are not unprecedented.
Indonesia relied on Soviet military assistance in the 1950s under Megawati's father and founding President Sukarno, but these were severed after the anti-communist Gen. Suharto seized power in 1965.
The United States quickly became the Southeast Asian country's main weapons supplier, and annual arms sales peaked at US$400 million in the 1980s.
In 1991, however, the U.S. Congress banned this after Indonesian troops killed hundreds of civilians in East Timor.
In 1999, East Timor became free, but only after Indonesian forces laid waste to it as they withdrew after a pro-independence referendum.
The shocking level of destruction prompted U.S. lawmakers to expand the ban to cover almost all military ties with Indonesia.
Since then some in the Bush administration -- particularly Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, a former ambassador to Jakarta and a prime architect of the Iraq war -- have pushed for the ban to be repealed.
So far, U.S. lawmakers have reinstated only a limited officer training program.
But that's far from enough for Indonesia's generals.
``I think the Indonesian military has finally decided that restrictions and conditionalities from Washington are just not worth it,'' said Juwono Sudarsono, a former defense minister.
``So they want to look for alternative sources for planes, helicopters and other hardware.''
Moscow has already had some success in wooing Indonesia as a customer.
Jakarta has recently purchased some Russian weapons, including 10,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles, a squadron of naval Mil-2 helicopters and a dozen BTR-80A amphibious carriers for its marines.
Currently, Indonesia uses short-range Rapier missiles purchased 30 years ago to protect its vital oil and natural gas fields in Sumatra, Borneo and Papua from air attack.
``Replenishing them has been a big problem,'' Sudarsono said.
Air defense commanders want to augment the Rapiers with Russia's impressive long-range S-300 missiles, or shorter-range systems such as the SA-15 Gauntlet or shoulder-fired Igla.
The Air Force is reportedly considering purchasing several squadrons of Sukhoi Su-27 interceptors, considered the world's premier dogfighters.
Previously, Indonesian Air Force commanders preferred Western jets that were compatible with the U.S.-made F-16 fighter-bombers already in the Indonesian inventory.
But neighboring Malaysia's success in integrating Russian MiG-29s and American F/A-18 Hornets persuaded them otherwise, Sudarsono said.
If Megawati does stiff-arm the United States on the weapons issue, it is unlikely relations with Washington will be permanently damaged.
Whatever happens, Indonesia, a mainly Muslim but politically secular state, is natural ally in the struggle against terrorism and religious militancy.
What could be more worrying for Washington is Russia's economic ambitions.
Trade between Indonesia and Russia increased by dlrs 36.2 million to dlrs 203.5 million in 2001 -- the last year for which statistics are available.
Analysts say this can only grow.
The real concerns, though, are in the petroleum sector.
Megawati and Putin are expected to sign agreements to give Russian companies a toehold in Indonesia's oil and gas industry, long dominated by American and British giants such as Exxon Mobil and BP.
A U.S.-sponsored forum that brought Iraqi opposition leaders together to shape the country's postwar government began Tuesday with a U.S. promise not to rule Iraq and concluded with an agreement to meet again in 10 days.
Meeting in the biblical birthplace of the prophet Abraham, delegates from Iraq's many factions discussed the role of religion in the future government and ways to rebuild the country.
But some Shiite Muslim groups boycotted the meeting and thousands protested nearby.
A 13-point statement released after the meeting stressed the need to work toward a democratic Iraq built on the rule of law and equality.
It also called for dissolving Saddam's Baath Party but left open the question of separating church from the state.
Retired Lt. Gen. Jay Garner, who will head the U.S.-led interim administration in Iraq, opened the conference under a golden-colored tent in the shadows of the 4,000-year-old ziggurat at Ur, a terraced temple platform of the ancient Sumerians.
``What better birthday can a man have than to begin it not only where civilization began but where a free Iraq and a democratic Iraq will begin today?'' said Garner, who turned 65 Tuesday and wore a twin American and Iraqi flag pin on his blue shirt.
White House envoy Zalmay Khalilzad told delegates that the United States has ``no interest, absolutely no interest, in ruling Iraq.''
``We want you to establish your own democratic system based on Iraqi traditions and values,'' Khalilzad said.
``I urge you to take this opportunity to cooperate with each other.''
Participants included Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites from inside the country and others who spent years in exile.
U.S. officials invited the groups, which picked their own representatives.
Many Iraqis boycotted the meeting in opposition to U.S. plans to install Garner atop an interim administration.
Thousands of Shiites -- who constitute Iraq's most populous religious group but were repressed under Saddam Hussein -- demonstrated in nearby Nasiriyah, chanting ``No to America and no to Saddam!''
``Iraq needs an Iraqi interim government.
Anything other than this tramples the rights of the Iraqi people and will be a return to the era of colonization,'' said Abdul Aziz Hakim, a leader of the largest Iraqi Shiite group, the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
U.S. officials hope more Iraqis join the process and stressed that this was just the first of many such meetings in Iraq.
The meeting concluded with the delegates voting by show of hands to meet again in 10 days.
A national conference is planned to select the interim administration, perhaps within weeks, a senior U.S. official said on condition of anonymity.
The interim administration could begin handing power back to Iraqi officials within three to six months, but forming a government will take longer, said Maj. Gen. Tim Cross, the top British member of Garner's team.
``One has to go through the process of building from the bottom up, allowing the leadership to establish itself, and then the election process to go through and so forth,'' Cross said.
``That full electoral process may well take longer.''
Garner's Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance is charged with coordinating humanitarian assistance, rebuilding infrastructure shattered by years of war and U.N. sanctions, and gradually handing back power to Iraqis leading a democratically elected government.
Tuesday's meeting was the first step toward that goal after the ouster of Saddam.
Sheik Ayad Jamal Al Din, a Shiite religious leader from Nasiriyah, urged the delegates to craft a secular government, according to a pool report.
But Nassar Hussein Musawi, a schoolteacher, disagreed: ``Those who would like to separate religion from the state are simply dreaming,'' he said.
Iraqi exile Hatem Mukhliss quoted President John F. Kennedy's exhortation, ``Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country,'' and called on Iraqis to write a constitution, establish a legal system and consider what role the army should play.
He asked coalition representatives to address problems of security, electricity and water in Iraq and help rebuild destroyed and looted hospitals.
``Saddam reduced the country to such a state that it was necessary for people to sell off personal possessions,'' Mukhliss said.
``Now it's time to take our country back.''
There are already tensions between the United States and some Iraqi factions.
Kurdish groups appear unwilling to compromise on their demand to expand the border of their autonomous area to include the oil-rich city of Kirkuk and Kurdish parts of the city of Mosul.
That could pose a problem for the United States, because Turkey worries that Kurdish control of Kirkuk could lead to aspirations for independence and in turn encourage separatist Kurds in Turkey.
Iraqi opposition leaders fear the United States is trying to force Ahmed Chalabi, head of the London-based umbrella Iraqi National Congress, on them as leader of a new Iraqi administration.
Chalabi was the first top Iraqi opposition leader to be airlifted by the U.S. military into southern Iraq as the fighting wound down, and he and other top members of his group plan to meet soon in Baghdad.
U.S. officials said Chalabi was brought in because he offered forces to the coalition.
Neither Chalabi nor many other leaders of anti-Saddam groups attended Tuesday's meeting, but they sent delegates.
Iraqis protesting the conference said it did not represent their interests.
The protesters held banners written in English and Arabic saying the ``Hawza,'' or the Shiite religious seminary in Najaf, represents them.
Even some of those at the meeting said they did not want Garner leading the interim administration.
``We will press for any Iraqi civilian administration regardless of what the Americans say.
An administration by Garner is not acceptable,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an Iraqi physician and opposition activist.
He said American officials have outlined what Garner's administration would look like: Each ministry would be headed by an American, either military or civilian.
Each minister would have two American deputies and eight American advisers, plus four Iraqi advisers from inside the country and four Iraqi exiles.
Associated Press writer Patrick McDowell in Kuwait City contributed to this report.
The lawyer for a Russian military journalist convicted of treason filed an appeal Wednesday in an effort to overturn the guilty verdict against his client, who was released on parole earlier this year, news agencies reported.
Grigory Pasko's lawyer Genri Reznik filed the appeal with Russian Supreme Court, the Interfax and ITAR-Tass news agencies reported.
He asked the court to invalidate the verdict and throw out the criminal case against Pasko, they said.
Pasko was sentenced to four years in prison in December 2001 for illegally attending a meeting of top military commanders and taking notes there.
A military court said he intended to pass the notes to Japanese media with which he had worked.
Pasko, whose sentence included time served, was released in January for good behavior after serving more than two-thirds of the sentence.
He has maintained his innocence, saying the military was punishing him for exposing environmental abuses by the Russian navy, including the dumping of radioactive waste into the sea.
Reznik said an initial appeal he lodged the day Pasko was freed never reached the presidium of the Supreme Court, according to Interfax.
The lawyer said the court's military board had refused to launch proceedings on the appeal.
Reznik said he addressed the new appeal directly to Supreme Court Chairman Vyacheslav Lebedev and asked that it not be considered by military judges ``because the military justice system has adopted a biased attitude against Pasko,'' Interfax reported.
The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Europe and Eurasia said Tuesday that the U.S. government won't be involved in choosing subcontractors for American companies named to help rebuild Iraq.
``The way it works is that there have been an initial set of contracts let to US companies, since it's U.S. money.
Those companies can subcontract to any company they want,'' Elizabeth Jones said.
She made the statements after a meeting with the speaker of the Portuguese parliament, Joao Mota Amaral.
``The U.S. government has done what it is going to do: it has opened up the process to international companies.
We can't direct commerce,'' Jones said.
``Once it's a commercial proposition, then international bidding processes come into effect.''
Jones met with Defense Minister Paulo Portas on Tuesday and will meet Foreign Minister Antonio Martins da Cruz before leaving Portugal Wednesday.
About 50 Portuguese companies - mostly in the construction sector -- are applying for subcontracts to help rebuild Iraq, Portuguese media reported.
Many are hoping to reap benefits from Portuguese government support of the U.S.-led war to oust Saddam Hussein.
Also, Portugal hosted a last ditch pre-war summit in the Azores islands for leaders of the United States, Britain and Spain.
Rudolph Giuliani will wed his companion, Judith Nathan, on May 24 in the ex-mayor's old home, Gracie Mansion.
The news was announced Thursday by Giuliani spokeswoman Sunny Mindel.
His successor, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, will perform the ceremony.
Giuliani, 58, proposed to Nathan, a former nurse, during a November business trip to Paris -- five months after he finalized his divorce from Donna Hanover after 20 years of marriage.
In interviews last year, Giuliani said Nathan gave him ``tremendous emotional support'' through his treatment for prostate cancer and as he led the city during the aftermath of the Sept.
11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center.
``We were close already,'' Giuliani said.
``And then we went through hell together.''
Giuliani and Nathan began appearing in public together in May 2000.
Soon after, he announced that he and Hanover were moving toward legal separation.
During the legal proceedings leading up to the divorce, a judge ruled that Nathan could not visit Gracie Mansion, the official mayoral residence, as long as Giuliani's children lived there.
Giuliani and Hanover have two teenage children, Andrew and Caroline.
The divorce settlement called for Giuliani to pay Hanover more than $6.8 million.
Hanover, 53, is host of a syndicated television show, ``Famous Homes and Hideaways.''
Last month, she and her fiance -- an old high school sweetheart -- invited the press along as they went shopping for wedding bands, saying they are planning a wedding in the New York City area this summer.
Giuliani's first marriage to his second cousin, Regina Peruggi, lasted about 14 years.
It was annulled by the Catholic Church because the couple had not obtained a church dispensation required when second cousins marry.
Nathan divorced wallpaper salesman Bruce Nathan in 1992.
They have a teenage daughter.
The Giuliani-Nathan nuptials will be a first for Bloomberg, who is making an exception from his policy of not performing weddings, said Bloomberg spokesman Ed Skyler.
Giuliani regularly officiated at weddings while in office.
``The mayor is honored by their request,'' Skyler said.
The United States and Britain are preparing a resolution that would give the United Nations a role in humanitarian relief but not peacekeeping in Iraq, a senior official in U.S. President George W. Bush's administration said Friday.
Separately, the United States has decided to divide the military and humanitarian relief mission in Iraq into three parts under American, British and Polish command, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Six European countries have agreed to contribute troops to the British and Polish sectors to create an international stability force, the official said.
The draft resolution would limit the U.N. role to helping with refugees and displaced people, reconstruction and humanitarian assistance, the official said.
The United States and Britain agree on all but a few of the fine details of the resolution, the official said, though there is no timetable on when it would be introduced.
U.N. officials are already in Iraq providing humanitarian relief.
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan said this week that the body has no interest in policing a postwar Iraq, although it could contribute to the political resuscitation of the country.
``Take the question of security.
I don't think the U.N. would want to take on that,'' Annan said.
``There has been a suggestion that the U.N. wanted to take over the whole Iraq and run it, which was also not the case.''
What the United Nations could contribute beyond humanitarian assistance was ``political facilitation,'' Annan said.
The proposed draft resolution would probably face resistance from other U.N. Security Council members who have favored a U.N.-convened conference of the kind that helped establish Afghanistan's post-Taliban government.
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld discussed the resolution with Prime Minister Tony Blair and Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon on Friday as Rumsfeld returned from a tour of Iraq, Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf region.
Rumsfeld said afterward he hoped the U.N. would play a role but did not publicly discuss the draft resolution outlining that role.
Hoon, who joined Rumsfeld in a news conference at Heathrow airport, also did not mention the draft resolution.
``We are right to be optimistic about the way forward'' in Iraq, Hoon said.
International stability forces will be sent to Iraq as soon as possible, the U.S. official said, though it was unclear when that would be.
Those troops will work to restore and maintain order and supervise humanitarian projects such as the restoration of water and electricity and delivery of food and medical aid.
The six nations contributing troops are Italy, Spain, Ukraine, Denmark, the Netherlands and Bulgaria, the official said.
Representatives of those countries will meet with British officials May 7 and Polish officials May 22 to determine what forces each country will contribute and whether they will be put under British or Polish command.
The U.S. part of the stability force will be comprised of American troops.
While that portion is likely to consist of a military division -- about 20,000 -- the troop strength of the other two sectors has yet to be determined, the official said.
The international stabilization force would be under the U.S. war commander, Gen. Tommy Franks.
At least initially, the coalition stability forces will augment rather than replace the 135,000 American troops inside Iraq, the official said.
The stability forces will focus on providing security and humanitarian relief while other U.S. troops focus on rooting out leftover members of Saddam Hussein's government and other armed elements in Iraq.
Rumsfeld said, however, that the more troops other countries contribute to the stability effort, the fewer U.S. troops will be needed inside Iraq.
Planning for both the U.N. resolution and the international security force left out France, Germany and Russia, three U.S. allies that vehemently opposed the war in Iraq.
Some of the NATO members who agreed to send troops may want NATO authorization for that action, the official said.
Requests for such authorization will be routed through the alliance's defense planning committee, which does not include France, the official said.
The outlines for the international stability force were decided at a conference Hoon hosted Wednesday with representatives from 16 countries, mostly NATO members.
Other countries including the Philippines, South Korea, Qatar and Australia agreed to send other help such as field hospitals, engineers, explosive ordnance disposal teams or nuclear, biological and chemical weapons experts.
The U.S., British and Polish sectors will be drawn to take into account ethnic, religious, tribal and political factions within Iraq, the official said.
For example, although ethnic Kurds are the majority in large parts of northern Iraq, there are also large numbers of Kurds within Baghdad.
Some Arab countries also want to play a role in the stability operation in Iraq but are reluctant to send troops because of political, religious and ethnic considerations, the official said.
Countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council have offered to donate money for the effort.
Rumsfeld also met Friday with King Abdullah of Jordan, an American ally in the Middle East.
Defense officials say Jordan provided key help in the Iraq war, acting as a staging area for U.S. special operations raids into western Iraq to prevent missiles from being fired at Jordan or Israel.
Rumsfeld did not say what the two discussed.
Police intercepted 33 African immigrants who came ashore Thursday in southern Spain aboard an overcrowded boat, including several pregnant women and other travelers suffering from hypothermia, police said.
Spanish media showed dramatic photos of police struggling to carry women on the verge of fainting after they were found wandering through Tarifa, Spain's windswept southern tip, Civil Guard officials told Spanish news agencies.
Police also arrested two Moroccan men suspected of trafficking in human beings and navigating the Zodiac boat across from Africa, Efe said.
Twenty-six of the would-be immigrants were from sub-Saharan Africa, six of them women, and the other seven were males from North African countries, police said.
Red Cross officials administered first aid on the scene, and the detainees were taken to a processing center for the government to begin expulsion proceedings.
Tens of thousands of destitute Africans try to enter Spain illegally each year by crossing the perilous Strait of Gibraltar to reach the southern mainland or by sailing northwest to the Canary Islands out in the Atlantic.
They seek a better life doing menial jobs in Spain or hope to use the country as a stepping stone to other points in Europe.
Most are caught trying to sneak in and some die in the attempt.
North Korea's military may have fired a laser at a U.S. helicopter in March, a U.S. official said Tuesday, as the communist state ditched its last legal obligation to keep itself free of nuclear weapons.
The aircraft's censors detected the unknown type of laser while it was flying near the heavily fortified frontier that divides the two Koreas, the U.S. military official said on condition of anonymity.
No one was injured and no equipment was damaged in the incident.
North Korea said Tuesday that a 1992 agreement with South Korea not to deploy nuclear arms on the Korean Peninsula was nullified, accusing the United States of derailing the deal.
``The inter-Korean declaration on denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was thus reduced to a dead document due to the U.S. vicious hostile policy to stifle the DPRK with nukes,'' said the North's official news agency, KCNA.
DPRK stands for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the North's official name.
The announcement came as U.S. President George W. Bush and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun were about to meet Wednesday in Washington to discuss North Korea's nuclear programs.
The accord was the last remaining legal obligation under which North Korea was banned from developing atomic arms.
In January this year, North Korea withdrew from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a global accord to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
A U.S. military official in Seoul, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Tuesday North Korea is believed to have exported US$580 million worth of missiles to Iran, Pakistan, Libya, Syria, Egypt, Yemen and the United Arab Emirates in 2001.
In December, a shipment of North Korean missiles bound for Yemen was briefly stopped in the Arabian Sea.
North Korea accuses the United States of planning to attack the communist country, which Bush has branded part of an ``axis of evil'' along with Iran and Iraq.
It also revived its claim that the U.S. military keeps many nuclear weapons in South Korea, turning the country into ``the biggest nuclear advance base in the Far East.''
Washington says it wants to use dialogue to resolve the nuclear crisis, although U.S. officials have not ruled out a military option.
North Korea ``keenly felt that the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula would only remain as a daydream unless the U.S. drops its hostile policy toward the DPRK,'' KCNA said.
It said the U.S. invasion of Iraq taught it that ``a war can be averted and the sovereignty of the country and the security of the nation can be protected only when a country has ... a strong military deterrent force capable of decisively repelling any attack to be made by any types of sophisticated weapons.''
In New York, South Korean President Roh said he will never condone North Korea's nuclear development, but Seoul and Washington agree the nuclear standoff with the North must be solved peacefully ``by all means.''
``It is incumbent upon Pyongyang to give up its nuclear project and come forward as a responsible member of the international community,'' he said.
``When the North takes this route, the Republic of Korea and the international community will extend the necessary support and cooperation.''
Julianne Lee, a Roh spokeswoman, said the North Korean statement might be a negotiating ploy in the wake of talks last month with U.S. officials in Beijing.
During the talks in Beijing, U.S. officials said North Korea claimed it already possesses nuclear weapons, and that it had reprocessed 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods -- a move that could yield several atomic bombs within months.
North Korea offered to drop its nuclear and missile programs in exchange for security guarantees and economic aid, according to U.S. officials.
The nuclear crisis flared in October, when Washington said North Korea admitted having a secret nuclear program in violation of a 1994 treaty with Washington.
Australia will keep open its embassy in Saudi Arabia despite decisions by the United States, Britain and Germany to close their diplomatic outposts in the country amid growing terror fears.
On the eve of a visit to the Saudi capital, Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said security at the Australian embassy appeared to be sufficient.
``We have quite a substantial security presence at the Australian embassy in Riyadh and the ambassador thinks that that security presence is sufficient,'' Downer told the Australian Broadcasting Corp.
Australia is one of Washington's staunchest allies.
Canberra sent troops to fight in the war on terror in Afghanistan and alongside U.S. and British forces in Iraq.
New Zealand also has no immediate plans to close its Saudi embassy.
On Tuesday, Saudi security officials said three suspected al-Qaida militants were arrested in Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, in sweeps following the near-simultaneous suicide attacks on three residential compounds on the outskirts of Riyadh on May 12.
The bombings killed 34 people -- including nine attackers, eight Americans and two Britons -- and wounded nearly 200 others.
Earlier this week, Saudi and U.S. officials said they had new intelligence pointing to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida group possibly launching fresh attacks in the United States or against American interests overseas.
Israeli troops shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and critically injured two children, ages 7 and 9, during conflicts in the West Bank that erupted Tuesday as Israeli and Palestinian leaders moved toward talks on a new Mideast peace plan.
The shootings -- which the Israeli army said came in response to attacks by Palestinians throwing stones and molotov cocktails -- came a day after Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared that Israel's occupation in the West Bank must end, stunning both dovish opponents and hardline allies.
Sharon's remarks and Israel's conditional acceptance Sunday of the so-called ``road map'' to peace were expected to jump-start stalled Mideast peace negotiations.
A summit between Sharon and his Palestinian counterpart, Mahmoud Abbas, had been planned for Wednesday but was postponed, according to Israeli and Palestinian officials, who blamed each other for the delay.
The officials said no new date had been set; Israel Radio said the meeting would take place Thursday.
A three-way summit with U.S. President George W. Bush could take place as early as next week, possibly in Jordan.
Israeli soldiers shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and wounded a 7-year-old boy after opening fire at stone throwers in the Tulkarem refugee camp in the West Bank on Tuesday, Palestinian hospital officials said.
The army said troops fired, and hit a boy, after a Palestinian youth threw a molotov cocktail.
In a village near the West Bank city of Nablus on Tuesday, Israeli troops opened fire on youths throwing stones, hitting a 9-year-old Palestinian boy in the head and critically wounding him, and hitting two 12-year-old boys in the legs, lightly wounding them, Palestinian hospital officials said.
A 10-year-old boy was struck in the leg by a rubber bullet, but was not seriously hurt, the officials said.
Military sources said troops were trying to break up stone-throwing protests, but did not use live fire.
The army was not aware of any injuries.
Five Palestinian children, a Palestinian woman and a police officer, were injured Tuesday after accidentally detonating explosives in the West Bank city of Hebron, Palestinian security officials said.
The children found the explosives in two plastic bags under a tree and accidentally detonated the first bag.
After a police officer arrived, the second bag exploded, seriously injuring him, the officials said.
Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teenager Monday and another surrendered after infiltrating from Gaza, the military said.
They were unarmed and apparently looking for work.
In a village near the West Bank town of Qalqiliya, an 11-year-old Palestinian boy was killed during an exchange of gunfire.
Also Monday, Israeli soldiers fired on four diplomatic vehicles in the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, diplomats said.
There were no injuries from the incident.
Peter Lundberg, an official from the Swedish Consulate in Jerusalem, said that two bullets hit the windshield of the Swiss Consulate's armored car, and that small-arms fire also was directed at other cars from Sweden, Denmark and the European Union.
Military sources said the Israeli army had established roadblocks at the entrance to Beit Hanoun to prevent Palestinians militants from leaving the area.
The sources said shots had been fired in the air when vehicles tried to skirt the roadblocks.
The violence erupted after Sharon endured withering criticism Monday from members of his own Likud Party over his Cabinet's acceptance of the U.S.-backed ``road map'' peace plan.
Sharon indicated a 180-degree turnaround after decades of warning that an Israeli withdrawal from even small parts of the West Bank could endanger Israel's existence.
Skeptics, however, wondered whether Sharon's conversion was a shrewd effort to deflect U.S. pressure in the hopes the road map would fail before Israel had to make tough concessions.
``To keep 3.5 million people under occupation is bad for us and them,'' Sharon said in remarks broadcast on Israel Radio.
The term ``occupation'' is anathema to the Israeli right, which believes Israel has a legitimate claim to the West Bank and Gaza Strip for religious and security reasons.
Palestinians and their dovish Israeli allies routinely use the word ``occupation'' when demanding that Israel leave the West Bank and Gaza and dismantle Jewish settlements.
Palestinians claim all of the West Bank and Gaza for a state.
On Sunday, Sharon's Cabinet conditionally approved the ``road map,'' a three-phase plan that begins with a halt to violence and envisages a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 2005.
Sharon told party critics he was committed to finding a political solution to the conflict, including an Israeli withdrawal from West Bank population centers.
``This can't continue endlessly.
Do you want to remain forever in Ramallah, Jenin, Nablus?'' he asked.
Likud lawmakers charged that the road map was slanted in favor of the Palestinians and endangers Israel.
In his remarks Monday, Sharon left himself an out.
``What will happen if Palestinian terror continues?
Nothing.
Nothing will happen.
The Palestinians will get nothing,'' he said.
Critics have said Sharon's long-held condition that all violence must stop before peace moves is unrealistic and guarantees failure of any peace initiative, including the road map, thus releasing him from the necessity of following through on his remarks.
Liberal lawmaker Yossi Sarid argued Sharon was trying to keep his intentions murky to persuade the U.S. government that he was committed to the plan, while his hawkish allies could assume he was just making a tactical move to end U.S. pressure.
``Ariel Sharon likes to walk in the fog, because then no one knows where he is headed,'' Sarid wrote in the Yediot Ahronot daily.
A retired navy officer facing life in prison over a failed effort to protect Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan, told a court Thursday he felt remorse for his part in the 1999 plot.
``I have a guilty conscience,'' Andonis Naxakis said during his two-hour testimony.
Naxakis is one of 13 people on trial for bringing the fugitive guerrilla leader to Greece.
Ocalan was moved by the government to its embassy compound in Kenya, where he was captured by Turkish commandos.
The retired Greek officer said he had been trying to get Ocalan to The Netherlands, home to a large Kurdish community.
He claimed he had been manipulated by the government.
``I believe I was unwittingly used as bait for its disgraceful plan ... an organized move by the government to hand Ocalan over to Turkey,'' he said.
Naxakis and two of Ocalan's Kurdish associates are being tried on criminal charges of endangering national security.
Ocalan, being tried in absentia, was indicted for entering the country illegally, a misdemeanor.
Ocalan, leader of the Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, is serving a life sentence in Turkey for leading a 15-year insurgency against the country that left 37,000 people dead.
He is being tried in Greece in absentia.
Five of the U.S. sailors killed in the attack on the destroyer "USS Cole" are now home.
A military transport plane brought the flag-draped caskets from Germany where they were taken yesterday.
An honor guard removed them to a hangar at Dover Air Force base for a short memorial service for close family members.
They requested privacy for today's proceedings.
The bodies of two other sailors recovered from the ship are in Bahrain and will be returned later.
More than 100 FBI agents and explosives experts are expected in Yemen by the end of the weekend to investigate the suspected terrorist attack.
A team of special Naval engineers will work on recovering the bodies of ten sailors listed as missing and presumed dead.
Officials suspect a suicide bombing caused the blast, which tore a 40 foot hole in the hull of the destroyer.
Pentagon sources say an early examination finds 400 to 500 pounds of explosives may have been used.
There are no confirmed suspects yet, but officials say several Middle East groups are expected to be investigated.
The summit is coinciding with more unrest in several areas of the West Bank and Gaza strip.
Hundreds of stone-throwing Palestinians stormed the Israeli-controlled section of Hebron, breaking a curfew imposed since the outbreak of the unrest last month.
Witnesses said Israeli soldiers fired live ammunition and rubber-coated metal bullets, wounding at least seven people.
Thousands of Palestinian demonstrators marched in the area to protest against a renewal of contacts with Israel.
The nuclear submarine "Kursk" could become a permanent underwater grave for 118 Russian sailors.
Russia's top admiral says he may scrap efforts to recover the bodies if experts decide the mission would endanger deep sea divers.
All those aboard the "Kursk" were killed in August when the sub sank after being damaged by an explosion in the Barents Sea.
The cause of the disaster has not been determined.
An international salvage team is due to arrive at the scene of the accident tomorrow.
A U.S. businessman accused of spying says he has no chance of getting a fair trial in Russia.
Edmond Pope appeared in a Moscow courtroom today and read from a 40-page statement, denying charges of espionage, and protesting his treatment by the court.
Russian prosecutors say Pope tried to buy secret blueprints for a high-speed torpedo used by the Russian military.
Pope's supporters say he was seeking information on an old Russian underwater propulsion system.
President Clinton says he's willing to meet separately with Israeli and Palestinian leaders if both sides work to end the Mideast violence.
The president proposed the talks in a call to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
Mr. Clinton says he wants to see Arafat and Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak abide by promises to end the bloodshed made at last week's emergency summit in Egypt.
A White House spokesman says Arafat is reviewing the offer.
Meanwhile, some 30,000 anti-Israeli protesters clashed with police in Jordan.
Demonstrators from across the country traveled to a west bank border town to call for the return of Palestinian refugees.
The number of police and protesters who were injured is still not known.
A note from a doomed sailor raises new questions about Russian efforts to save the crew of the submarine "Kursk."
The note was found in the pocket of a sailor whose body was recovered yesterday.
It was written after explosions sent the "Kursk" to the bottom of the sea.
It confirms 23 sailors survived.
For days, teams tried without success to open the escape hatch.
It was pried open by divers from Norway who found no one left alive.
Relatives have complained some sailors might have been rescued had Russia sought help immediately.
The widow of the sailor who wrote the note wept today as she was interviewed on Russian television.
I came here after I heard the official announcement on TV.
I love him very much.
I want to see him and I want to read his letter.
While the cause of the "Kursk" disaster remains unknown, Russian officials say the sub may have collided with a World War II mine or there may have been an internal malfunction.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres is expected to meet soon with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in an attempt to quell Mideast violence.
The meeting comes amid fresh clashes between the two sides.
Fighting broke out in Ramallah, Hebron and at the border crossings between Israel and Gaza today.
Three Palestinians were killed, at least 49 people wounded.
Overnight, Israeli gunships attacked three headquarters of Fatah, the political party allied with Arafat.
Israel calls it a response to Palestinian guerrilla warfare.
Arafat is condemning the attacks.
A verdict handed down three years ago today brought debate from both sides of the Atlantic.
In this edition of "Headliners," Bob Glascoff has the story of British au pair Louise Woodward and finds out what she's doing now.
October 1997.
Louise Woodward is sentenced to life in prison on charges she murdered an infant boy.
Woodward, then a 19-year-old au pair from Britain, was accused of killing 8-month-old Matthew Eappen by shaking him and slamming his head.
The case attracted widespread attention in England, where many thought she was innocent.
Woodward had been living with the Eappen family taking care of their two young sons.
Despite receiving a life sentence, her charges were reduced two weeks later from second-degree murder to manslaughter.
She was sentenced to time served and released.
Woodward returned to Britain in 1998 to another controversy.
Her parents were accused of defrauding her defense fund.
They went on trial this year and were acquitted.
Today, Woodward is studying to be a lawyer.
With "Headliners," I'm Bob Glascoff.
An Oregon girl missing for 15 years has been reunited with her family.
The mother says her daughter was taken by her baby-sitter when she was just 3 years old.
The alleged abduction of Fallon Marie Hodges was never reported to police.
Authorities say the girl contacted law enforcement in Nevada last Friday saying she needed help in finding her identity.
She says she was abandoned by her surrogate parents, one of whom was her alleged kidnapper.
The name Father Frost may not be familiar to you, but to Russian children, Christmas wouldn't be the same without him.
Denise Dillon reports.
Santa Claus visited the northern Russian city of Veliki Ustyug to meet with his Russian counterpart, Father Frost.
It's believed Veliki Ustyug, which is about 600 miles north of Moscow, is the hometown of Father Frost, one of the main characters of Russian Christmas stories.
The 50,000 residents here have a deep respect for the history of their town, and it seemed as though all of them bundled up against the cold and came out to welcome Santa and Father Frost as they rode into the town's central square on a horse-drawn carriage.
People who live here hope this is the beginning of a long tradition that others around the world will celebrate with them.
A new great holiday came to our town.
This is how new traditions are generated.
And I hope this holiday will become nationwide soon.
As for us, we are always happy to see guests in our town.
When Santa arrived, the temperature was 16 degrees below 0, but that did not stop the Russian folk singers and dancers from performing traditional dances.
Later, Santa visited Father Frost's home, where they met with all the good little boys and girls.
When you believe in Santa Claus, then you are good people and good children.
Then your dreams can come true.
Children around the world believe that Santa Claus or Father Frost will bring them good luck, and presents, for the holidays.
Denise Dillon, "Headline News."
A woman whose husband was killed in last month's crash of a Singapore Airlines plane has filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the carrier.
Investigators say the Boeing 747 hit a barrier and a crane on the runway and exploded during takeoff.
82 people were killed.
The lawsuit filed in Federal court says negligence and reckless misconduct contributed to the crash.
A spokesman for Singapore Airlines declined to comment.
The Navy now says it will cost about $240 million to get the "USS Cole" up and running again.
Officials originally estimated it would cost $150 million to repair the gaping hole in the ship's midsection.
But a Naval official says that does not include the cost of replacing equipment and weapons damaged in the attack carried out by suicide bombers in Yemen.
The ship is scheduled to arrive in Mississippi in about ten days.
Russia's Presidential Clemency Commission is advising president Vladimir Putin to release convicted American spy Edmund Pope on humanitarian grounds.
A top Putin aide says Pope could be home by Christmas.
However, according to Russian law, Putin cannot issue a pardon any earlier than December.
Pope was convicted of espionage Wednesday in Moscow and sentenced to 20 years in prison.
He suffers from a rare form of bone cancer and has asked Putin to let him return to the U.S. to receive medical care.
Ousted Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif is heading to exile in Saudi Arabia.
He left Pakistan yesterday, after being pardoned by the president.
Sharif had been in jail since his ouster in a military coup last year.
He was convicted of kidnapping and corruption.
Saudi Arabia offered to accept Sharif and more than a dozen members of his family on humanitarian grounds.
Will winter storms affect the weather where you are?
Let's check the "Headline News" extended forecast.
Another round of winter weather is expected today as another major winter storm will be spreading from the southern plains through the Ohio River valley and eventually into the Northeast.
Cities like Springfield, Missouri, back towards St. Louis and Indianapolis and Columbus will pick up the heaviest snowfall.
Over six inches is expected by tomorrow morning, and then moving in towards the northeast, where we expect even some ice in some of the suburbs to the northwestern areas of New York City.
Here's a look at the forecast weather map -- slow pressure is moving in towards the Ohio River valley and eventually into the northeast by late tomorrow.
It's moving rather quickly, too, so the precipitation will be ending through the Midwest as high pressure builds in tomorrow.
Look for the snow to continue into New England tomorrow.
Friday, rain into the southeast.
There will be some showers in the Northwest.
Temperature-wise, it remains cold over the northern tier.
It begins to warm up over parts of the south.
A wet day on Saturday over much of the East and Southeast.
There'll be some snows, though, back into the Midwest.
Forecast highs are still on the cold side.
And as we check out Sunday's weather, snow through the great lakes and rain into the Northeast with forecast highs mainly in the over the northeastern U.S.
I'm meteorologist Dave Hennen.
For more weather information, login to cnn.com.
The damaged "USS Cole" comes home today.
It's due to arrive in Pascagoula, Mississippi, this morning.
The destroyer was christened there five years ago.
Repairs are expected to cost about $240 million.
Yemeni and U.S. authorities are still investigating the October bombing.
17 sailors were killed.
Yemen's Prime Minister says at least three Yemenis will go on trial next month in connection with the attack.
They're suspected of belonging to an international terrorist network.
Edmund Pope, the U.S. businessman convicted of espionage in Russia, is offering the first details of his eight-month stay in a Moscow prison.
Speaking from a U.S. military hospital in Germany, Pope says he was treated well by prison guards, but suffered from mental anguish and depression.
Today, Pope is undergoing an extensive medical checkup, to see if there is any recurrence of bone cancer.
He's undergoing tests for skin cancer as well.
He will wait for the results before returning home to the U.S.
Pope was pardoned yesterday by Russian president Vladimir Putin.
U.S. and Yemeni officials have released a photo of one of the suicide bombers killed in the attack on the "USS Cole" in the port of Aden October.
17 U.S. sailors were killed and 39 others hurt.
The officials say Yemeni national Hussan Saeed Awad Al-Khamri was described by a boy as having launched the boat used in the attack.
Six possible suspects are still being held in Yemen pending a trial that could start as early as next month.
Investigators say they're still looking for other key suspects.
Many people in North America will be able to experience a partial solar eclipse tomorrow.
But scientists say it won't block much Christmas sunlight in most places.
As always, eclipse fans are being warned not to look directly at the Sun because that can cause permanent eye damage.
The eclipse will occur at around 12 P.M. Eastern Time.
The best view will be in the Northeast.
Welcome all to my new site.
I've decided to incorporate my old work blog into a general blog, the work diary is up on the right titled "my work diary".
EFF YEAH!
BUSH WON!
OK then.
My next thought.
The world is a much better place now that the terrorist Yassar Arafat is dead.
Here is a good one minute video on his great legacy Here.
This guy was one of the early innovators of terrorism in this century and he is protrayed by the Main Stream Media (MSM for short) as a "freedom fighter".
Because of him millions of palestinians chose "jihad" over peace with Isreal.
He innovated suicide bombers and plane hijacking plus he embezzelled hundreds of millions of dollars from aid funds.
...and this guy got a nobel peace prize, what a disgrace.
UPDATE 1 - Drudge is reporting that Arafat has been skimming 2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories.
MAG: Arafat Skimmed $2 Million a Month From the Gas Trade Sun Nov 14 2004 09:53:40 ETNew York.
-- Last year auditors discovered Arafat was guilty of skimming $2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories, TIME reports.
In August 2002 international donors forced Arafat to sign over his investments to the Palestine Investment Fund, which was audited by U.S. accountants and managed by Palestinian Finance Minister Salam Fayyad, a former International Monetary Fund official.
After scouring corporations throughout the Arab world and bank accounts in the Cayman Islands and Luxembourg, the auditors identified $800 million, which has been made a part of the Palestinian Authority's official budget.
It's the most successful financial reform in the Arab world, -- Jim Prince, president of the Los Angeles-based Democracy Council and head of the audit team, tells TIME.
People close to Fayyad's investigation told TIME of Arafat's skimming from the gas trade.
Breaking the gasoline smuggling and corruption boosted the Palestinian Authority's official treasury by $10 million a month and cut gas prices for ordinary Palestinians.
"Arafat's death means his followers may never know just how much more they may be owed, "writes TIME's Matt Rees in "Where's Arafat's Money?"
In the mid-1990s, Arafat controlled a financial empire worth at least $3 billion.
By the time of his death, he was down to his last $1 billion, according to Israeli-intelligence estimates.
Arafat wife Suha's outburst that his successors were "trying to bury [him] alive" came after she learned that Arafat had signed over at least $800 million to the government of the Palestinian Authority two years ago, TIME reports.
Top Palestinian officials say Suha wants the new chief of the P.L.O., Mahmoud Abbas, and Palestinian prime minister Ahmed Qurei to give her money out of the P.L.O.'s party coffers.
But a senior P.L.O. official tells TIME, "they'll pay her a pension, and that's it."
People familiar with Arafat's finances say the Palestinian leader sent Suha $200,000 a month out of the Palestinian Authority's budget for the Office of the President.
French authorities are investigating transfers of $15 million from Swiss banks to Paris accounts in Suha's name at the Arab Bank and at BNP Paribas Bank, a French bank, TIME reports.
Senior Palestinian security officials tell TIME that Arafat also shipped money to the gunmen of the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.
Developing.
.. Sure sounds like a Nobel Prize winner to me.
Time is reporting today that a al-Qaeda operative was captured and is spitting out that they have plans in the work to smuggle nukes into the US from Mexico, see the article here.
Thank god Bush is still our president, although I strongly disagree with him on his new immigration policy.
This policy would just make it easier for the enemy to get within our borders.
Just reported from AP that Condi Rice has been chosen by President Bush to become the new Secretary of State for his second term.
I agree with his choice and think she will make a much better Secretary then Powell did.
Her views are much more in step with the President then Powell, although he was a true soldier and carried the message.
Plus, any lady who works out to Led Zeppelin and is a Football nut is alright in my book.
Thanks to Captain Ed for bringing this up.
Apparently James Baker, former Secretary of State and current envoy for the Bush Administration, has asked the Isreali government to release a scumbag terrorist to promote "peace".
There is now ... in an Israeli prison a man named Marwan Barghouti, who is one of the young guard of Palestinians, and if the Palestinians are going to make this work against the really hard-line elements, the Islamists and some of the people of Hamas, they're going to have to have a coalition of the young guard and the old guard.
Gotta say that this shocked me, I've always thought Mr. Baker was a upstanding guy but this is just plain good old fashioned bullcrap.
Here are some of the fine achievements of the terrorist Marwan Barghouti Marwan Barghouti (born June 6, 1958) is a Palestinian leader from the West Bank and a leader of the Fatah movement that forms the backbone of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
On June 6, 2004, he was sentenced to five life sentences for five murders of Israeli civilians and 40 years imprisonment for attempted murders in terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians.
Barghouti was one of the major leaders of the First Intifada in 1987, leading Palestinians in a mass uprising against Israeli occupation of the West Bank.
During the uprising, he was arrested by Israel and deported to Jordan, where he stayed for seven years until he was permitted to return under the terms of the Oslo Accords in 1994.
In 1996, he was elected to the Palestinian Legislative Council, in which he advocated peace with Israel, sometimes coming in conflict with Yasser Arafat.
The formal position occupied by Barghouti was the General Secretary of Fatah in the West Bank.
By the summer of 2000, Barghouti and Arafat had grown increasingly at odds with each other, with Barghouti accusing Arafat's administration of corruption and his security services of human rights violations, and Arafat was planning to fire him shortly.
However, as the Second Intifada began, Barghouti became increasingly popular as a leader of the Fatah Tanzim militia.
This was perhaps due to the transformation of Tanzim into an organization more resembling militant groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad, responsible for dozens of civilian deaths in drive-by shootings.
Under Barghouti, the Tanzim has also carried out suicide bombings in Israel under the name al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades.
What is he thinking?
Release a known terrorist to run the PLO and that will bring about peace, give me a effin break.
Chris Matthews, that idiot talking head over at MSNBC, said yesterday about the terrorists we fought in Fallujah "a rival, I mean they're not bad guys especially, just people who just disagree with us".
...this just amazes me, the complete idiocy of this waste of human sperm.
These are the same terrorists blowing up families, chopping off heads of civilians, and the complete disregard for any human life and they just disagree with us?
Tell that to the family of Margaret Hassan, the school teacher who was brutally tortured and then slaughtered by these same guys, they ain't so bad are they Chris Matthews?
This women who was known for her 30 years of work in Iraq, distributing medicine, food and supplies to Iraqis suffering under the sanctions of the 1990s.
British officials say they believe Hassan was a blindfolded woman seen being shot in the head by a hooded militant on a video obtained but not aired by the Arab television station Al-Jazeera.
She would be the first foreign woman to die in the wave of kidnappings in Iraq.
No group has claimed responsibility.
On Sunday, Marines found the mutilated body of what they believe was a Western woman on a street in Fallujah during the U.S. assault on the insurgent stronghold.
The body, clothed in what appeared to be a purple, velour dress, was wrapped in a blanket, with a blood-soaked black cloth nearby.
As of Tuesday night, the U.S. command said the body had not been identified.
These are the reasons that none of these mothereffers should ever see the light of day.
..they need to be all lined up and shot.
Torturing this poor women for what?
WHAT?
And we should treat them as enemy soldiers under the Geneva Convention.
Last I remember the convention applies to countries that signed the document and the two countries must have standing armies with uniforms.
...the Iraqi military is at our side, the terrorists are not.
Since when are terrorists soldiers?
They are lower then dogs.
Finally there is this written by a student of Mrs. Hassan She was my English teacher.
In the memory of my teacher and a fellow aid worker colleague Mrs. M. Hassan.
Mrs. Hassan was my English teacher in The British Council in Baghdad in Al-Wazirya district, I remember her years ago with her Irish accent telling me it's not Important how many words I must learn but the pronunciation of the words I already knew must be perfected.
Mrs. Hassan speak s perfect Arabic and she has a heart of gold, she's been killed by (men in pajamas), turn Iraq upside down and find them.
The Marines will find them, and when they do they shall die.
2Slick pointed me to a article at In Iraq For 365.
This is a great blog and I encourage you all to read it regularly.
On Sunday he wrote of two Iraqi soldiers who didn't see us as conquerors but as allies when the Mosul bombing occurred.
The suicide bomb sprayed bb-like fragments throughout the Marez dining facility.
One piece of shrapnel sliced through the femoral artery of a U.S. soldier and his only chance for survival was in the hands of these two Iraqis.
Recalling the medical classes they'd received from the special forces, the Iraqis reacted calmly, fastening a belt above the wound, creating a tourniquet, which stopped the gushing stream of red.
They moved the soldier to a MEDVAC vehicle via two-man litter carry.
After they hoisted the soldier in the truck, the two Iraqis -- one an officer, the other an NCO -- ran back to the facility and began treating the other wounded without regard for their safety.
When the dust settled and the mess tent had been evacuated, everybody who could talk was questioned about their health.
When the medics came to the two Iraqis, the ING soldiers only wanted to know how everybody else was.
When asked why did they do it, they simply stated, "this was our duty; we are a team, and we take care of each other."
Even the Americans.
No matter what the MSM tries to tell you, there are Iraqi's who will help the allies, who will fight alongside them and put their lives at risk to make sure Democracy succeeds in their country.
This brings to mind a speech Prime Minister Tony Blair gave recently while visiting Iraq.
When I meet the people working alongside the United Nations--Iraqis in fear of their life every day, because they are trying to bring freedom and democracy to their people--when I see their courage and their determination and know that they speak for the vast majority of people in Iraq who want that democracy and freedom, then I know that we are doing the right thing.
And I will also say this to you: There are people dying in Iraq, but the reason people are dying is because of the terrorism and the intimidation and the people who are deliberately killing anyone trying to make this country better.
Now what should our response be as an international community?
Our response should be to stand alongside the democrats--the people who've got the courage to see this thing through--and help them see it through.
I've got no doubt at all that that is the right thing for us to do.
Sometimes when I see some of the reporting of what's happening in Iraq in the rest of the world, I just feel that people should understand how precious what has been created here is.
And those people from that electoral commission that I described as the heroes of the new Iraq--every day ... a lot of them aren't living in the Green Zone, they've got to travel in from outside.
They do not know at any point in time whether they're going to be subject to brutality or intimidation, even death, and yet they carry on doing it.
Now what a magnificent example of the human spirit--that's the side we should be on.
This recent news story is troubling in many different ways.
When I first heard of the story I figured it was some wackjob playing with a new toy but now we find out there have been 7 incidents since Christmas from the West to East coast.
The FBI, concerned that terrorists could use lasers as weapons, is investigating why laser beams were directed into the cockpits of seven airplanes in flight since Christmas.
Laser beams can temporarily blind or disorient pilots and possibly cause a plane to crash.
The FBI is looking into two incidents in Colorado Springs, Colo., and one each in Cleveland, Washington, Houston, Teterboro, N.J., and Medford, Ore., according to federal and local law enforcement and transportation officials, some of whom spoke only on condition of anonymity.
A federal law enforcement official, who declined to be identified by name, said Thursday there is no evidence of a plot or terrorist activity.
But pilots are troubled by the incidents, and the FBI earlier this month warned of the possibility that terrorists might use the devices as weapons.
"It's not some kid," said Paul Rancatore, a pilot who serves as deputy chairman of the security committee for the Allied Pilots Association.
"It's too organized."
Loren Thompson, who teaches military technology at Georgetown University, called it a "rather worrisome development," though he said experts would be more puzzled than alarmed.
"What we're talking about is a fairly powerful visible light laser that has the ability to lock onto a fast-moving aircraft," Thompson said.
"That's not the sort of thing you pick up at a military surplus store."
Thompson said a piece of equipment that could do the things the FBI suspects would be "fairly expensive and fairly sophisticated."
"It sounds like an organized effort to cause airline accidents," Thompson said.
Michelle Malkin has a post about this today where some outlets have stopped selling lasers.
Lots of people think that these indeed might be loonies playing with new Christmas toys but I disagree.
These are incidents where the Airplanes were tracked , some as high as 8500 feet.
To track a fast moving plane at that altitude would not be some toy you can get from the local wal-mart.
In my opinion this is quite alarming.
This Isn't Writing, It's Typing has a great post out with a ton of info, some of it quite scary A more frightening scenario is that terrorists may have obtained a Chinese-produced ZM-87 laser blinder which is specifically designed to blind eyesight.
The Japanese terrorist cult Aum Shinrikyo--which launched the infamous Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway system in 1995--was discovered to have experimented with the use of lasers as weapons.
According to The Asian Pacific Post, "Cult members apparently obtained laser design information from Russian institutes they visited and built a laser weapon mounted on a truck.
They had planned to use the laser against Tokyo policemen, but the plan failed when the laser malfunctioned during the testing stage."
PoliticAlex also has some info on this story also.
I found the following report that was presented to Congress recently about the shoulder launched missle threat to airliners, which this might very well be a precursor to: Recent events have focused attention on the threat that terrorists with shoulder fired surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), referred to as Man-Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS), pose to commercial airliners.
Most believe that no single solution exists to effectively mitigate this threat.
Instead, a menu of options may be considered, including installing infrared (IR) countermeasures on aircraft; modifying flight operations and air traffic control procedures; improving airport and regional security; and strengthening missile non-proliferation efforts.
Equipping aircraft with missile countermeasure systems can protect the aircraft even when operating in areas where ground-based security measures are unavailable or infeasible to implement.
However, this option has a relatively high cost, between $1 million and $3 million per aircraft, and the time needed for implementation does not allow for immediate response to the existing terrorist threat.
Procedural improvements such as specific flight crew training, altering air traffic procedures to minimize exposure to the threat, and improved security near airports may be less costly than countermeasures and could more immediately help deter domestic terrorist attacks.
However, these techniques by themselves cannot completely mitigate the risk of domestic attacks and would not protect U.S. airliners flying to and from foreign airports.
Legislation introduced in the 108th Congress (H.R. 580, S. 311) calls for the installation of missile defense systems in all turbojet aircraft used in scheduled air carrier service.
While this legislation is still under consideration, Homeland Security appropriations designated $60 million in FY2004 and $61 million in FY2005 to fund a program to develop and test prototype missile countermeasure systems for commercial aircraft based on existing military technology.
It is anticipated that at the conclusion of this program, in January 2006, the Department of Homeland Security will be able to provide a detailed analysis of the suitability of such systems for use to protect commercial passenger aircraft.
American Future has a link up to a article written in yesterdays Houston Chronicle.
It describes how the European Governments look to be changing their tune in regards to President Bush.
Why you ask?
But there is arguably more to this sea change than just a grumpy acceptance of the status quo.
From a European perspective, three things are making it easier to warm to the Bush White House.
One is the death of Yasser Arafat.
No issue divides Europe and the United States more keenly than the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
For the last few years, Europeans have criticized Bush for failing to put enough pressure on Israel to get out of the occupied territories and for refusing to deal with Arafat.
That another reason why I respect Bush so much, his refusal to acknowledge that windbag terrorist Arafat.
May he rot in hell.
But since Arafat's death, Europeans and Americans have been able to find common ground: supporting Ariel Sharon's withdrawal from Gaza, putting pressure on Israel to let the Palestinians hold elections and, covertly, backing Mahmoud Abbas to become the next Palestinian leader.
A second reason is Europe's growing worries about Islamic terrorism.
The murder in November of Theo van Gogh, a provocative Dutch filmmaker, at the hands of an Islamic militant has been called Europe's 9/11.
Though the two events are obviously not fully comparable, it is certainly true that American conservatives, such as Francis Fukuyama and Bernard Lewis, have found a wider audience recently for the idea that radical Islam is inimical to European traditions of tolerance.
You mean those radical muslims can be kinda nasty sometimes?
Get outta here.
...Keep doing business like the cowards in Spain and they will more then likely have their very own 9/11 to cry about.
The third force is the reappearance, albeit in a milder form, of the threat that kept the trans-Atlantic alliance together for half a century.
The Russian bear is growling again.
The Ukrainian election --- complete with its KGB-style poisoning of the opposition leader and heavy-handed electoral fraud -- has reminded European diplomats of Vladimir V. Putin's determination to control his "near abroad."
They should be very worried about this item, I believe Putin is slowly sliding Russia back to what it once was.
Hopefully our Government isn't asleep at the wheel with this situation either.
There is a personal edge to all this.
Just as the snooty continentals eventually came to admire the gormless Hollywood actor, there is a grudging willingness to rethink some prejudices about the inarticulate Texan.
Many European leaders once swallowed the Michael Moore version of history: that Bush was an ignorant interloper who stole the White House.
His thumping re-election, however, shows that he represents a large body of conservative American opinion.
In short, Europeans are getting used to the idea that it is not Bush who is the exception, but the U.S. itself that is exceptional --- and that if they want to deal with this exceptional superpower they need to humor it rather than rile it.
Strangely enough, this has been Tony Blair's strategy all along; it is rapidly becoming the Continent's strategy, too.
Couldn't of ended that article any better myself.
Get used to it France, we ain't going nowhere.
Nicolae Mischie, authoritarian leader of a district organization of the main opposition party, has been jailed.
Romania voted in the last December, ousting the so-called socialist party PSD (Social-Democratic Party).
PSD managed to keep a stronghold in poor rural areas, with the help of people like Mischie.
They combined blackmail, using their right of decision regarding the public funds for local leaders opposing PSD, and strong seduction of the uneducated masses, in a marvelous way.
E.g., Mischie, who talks like an idiot, got a PhD in history.
His paper was on a political personality of the 19th century and Mischie bought the house where his paper's subject lived.
Maybe he tried to invest in his paper, maybe he believed sincerely in his admiration for the poor innocent dead guy and his ability of earning PhDs, but using a big car and living in a big house are signs for the masses that the man is an invaluable and irreplaceable leader.
Another misleading sign was his position as a University professor - he was teaching mostly at private universities, which are still ways to buy diplomas here in Romania.
Local leaders did their jobs, but national leaders, pressuring TV stations to lie, associating with old communist ex-president Ion Iliescu, failed to win in big cities.
PSD is building a strategy for the 4 years to come and they are going to elect a leader.
It is known that communist leaders die in office (as judges of the U.S. Supreme Court) and Ion Iliescu won't be different.
All the leaders that expressed different points of view will be excluded from the party, that's the untold truth that Romanian media seem to hide or not conceive yet.
Mischie was right to criticize the national leaders, because PSD got a good share in the elections in his area.
But Mischie was wrong, because he did that while in vacation in Switzerland, where you can't go if you earn 20K $ a year.
The new power had nothing to do, but let the policemen do what they should be doing years ago.
Iliescu and Nastase, ex-president and ex-prime minister, are now left only with the leadership of the party and holding this illusory authority.
If Mischie wouldn't take his chance on them, he would still be free, with the help of the weak and weakening strings Iliescu might still pull.
The interim government declared a state of emergency in Iraq excluding the Kurdish region for 60 days, according to the National Security Law introduced last August which states that emergency laws can be declared in the country for a period no more than 60 days provided a serious threat against Iraqi national security is recognised by the interim government.
Obviously, this is a necessary step that should have been taken at least two months ago.
Suicide bombings and guerrilla attacks carried out by insurgents and foreign terrorists based around Baghdad have escalated to alarming levels particularly during Ramadan.
Deputy governor of Diyala along with several council members from Ba'quba were ambushed and killed in Latifiya south of Baghdad, an area which has supposedly been 'cleared' from insurgents a couple of weeks ago.
Four suicide attacks in Samarra, also a recently 'liberated' area, against National Guard units and the governorate building.
Zarqawi's group claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Three police stations in Haditha, a small town west of Ramadi, were assaulted by groups of insurgents.
Some 30 policemen were captured, tied up and executed in cold blood against the walls following a confrontation which lasted two hours.
Zarqawi's group, again, claiming responsibility.
A full-scale military operation against Fallujah, which is apparently underway already, seems to be the government's 'final solution'.
I'm not optimistic to the outcome, especially when significant civilian casualties are unavoidable.
Note, that I'm not suggesting a peaceful or political solution would work either in these areas.
Insurgents west of Baghdad have quite obstinately made it clear that nothing but full control of the country, or at least the Anbar governorate, will satisfy them.
They have refused to participate in the political process, they have repeatedly announced their intentions to boycott the elections and to disrupt them in other areas, and they do not recognise the government or any other authority in the country beside themselves.
The demands of the Fallujah negotiants from the government weeks ago were obscene and they clearly reflect the overt sectarianism and regionalism of the armed groups in the area.
The demands were not released to the Iraqi public at the time for unkown reasons but they have leaked out days ago.
Here are just a few of them:
-A clear timetable for the withdrawal of foreign occupation forces.
(fair enough).
-Immediate withdrawal of US and Iraqi security forces from the Anbar governorate and the handover of security responsibilities to former army officers from Anbar.
-The appointment of ministers from the Anbar governorate to the ministries of Interior, Defense, Oil and Finance.
-The removal of certain officials (most of them from Shi'ite Islamic parties such as Ibrahim Al-Ja'fari) from governmental positions.
-The complete return of Ba'athists, army officers, Republican Guards, Mukhabarat, intelligence and security personnel to their former positions.
-The removal of Shi'ite Edhan (call for prayers) from official television and radio programs.
-Incomes of Shi'ite sacred shrines should be returned under the control of the Ministry of Endowments and Religious Affairs.
These last two demands have been allegedly added by Sheikh Harith Al-Dhari (head of the Association of Muslim Scholars) and are said to have been a major reason behind the failure of negotiations with the government.
Iraqis here in the south were shocked to hear of these demands and sectarian tensions are on the rise.
It scares me to see the reaction of people around me whenever Fallujah is mentioned.
The director of a primary health care clinic was remarking the other day that "Fallujah should be burnt upon its residents and then razed to the ground.
They are the sons of Mu'awiya, may Allah curse them all."
Sidenote: Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan was the governor of Syria during the 7th century and he fought Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (Muhammed's son-in-law) over the Caliphate after the assassination of Caliph Othman.
He became the first Ummayid Caliph and two decades later, under the Caliphate of his son Yazid, Imam Hussein bin Ali (grandson of Muhammed) was killed by his armies at present day Karbala.
Someone hushed the director and pointed out to him that I'm Sunni.
He was a bit embarrassed and tried to explain that he was referring to Wahhabis and foreign fighters.
It was a bit uncomfortable and I could feel that people were giving me furtive glances.
Refugees have been pouring out of Fallujah over the last few days into Baghdad and the surrounding areas.
The military operation will undoubtly aggravate the humanitarian situation inside the city since there are definitely thousands of families with no place to go.
Refugees in Baghdad have confirmed the rumours that the 'Mujahideen' are forcing men from 15-50 years old to stay and that they were threatened with execution if they refuse to carry arms in defense of the town.
Majlis Shura Al-Mujahideen (The Mujahideen Advisory Council) are in control of Fallujah and they have distributed a statement inviting Arab and foreign (including American) media reporters to enter the town and cover the battles.
The statement carried the insignia of Zarqawi's group Qa'idat Al-Jihad.
Everyone is closely watching what the next few days will bring, hoping the violence doesn't spread to the streets of Baghdad or other areas.
I'm still holed up in Basrah but I'll try to be on the road as soon as possible.
Gazprom, the main Russian gas company, has been denied a $10 billion credit line due to the political situation in Russia.
The company intended to use the cash to pay an artificially low price for Yukos assets (hence that firm's bankruptcy filing a few days ago -- you know it's bad when you have to use US courts to protect your own assets from appropriation by your home country).
It's starting to look like Putin's goal is a sort of judicial nationalization -- taking control of key assets through court, rather than executive, fiat.
But the markets have caught on, and Russia may be deprived of the capital it needs to grow.
Don't expect any of the Russian leadership to reverse course; given the current trends there, they'll just Blame the West when their screwy plan screws them over.
One of the rules of thumb that has guided my (limited) business career from the beginning is that China is never as lucrative as it looks.
This assumption is based on about 150 years of economic history, including several booms in interest and investment in China.
Their biggest problem: There's usually a 200-to-1 ratio of Nearly Starving Peasant Laborers to Absurdly Well-Off Government Employees.
And now it's an iffier 100-to-1, since there are also rich private sector employees and the labor force isn't quite so expendable.
What they've been missing for years was the real driver behind any consumer economy: Consumers.
Specifically, they didn't have a real middle class.
That's changed in the last twenty years, as increasing social mobility and a burst in foreign demand has finally made China a genuine, rather than theoretical, contender.
And they've even supplied proof of their economic viability, announcing that they've beaten Japan for exports to the US.
If only I'd figured this out in early 2002, when their stock market was by some stretch of the imagination cheap.
I dunno if you want anything to do with their stock market.
For one, its perforance last year was pretty dismal.
More importantly, its a structural nuthouse.
Unfortunately, minority shareholder rights are virtually non-existent, and excluding the dodgy financial statements listed on the exchange, lots of times companies are more interested in generating cash from an IPO then actually bothering with shareholder value.
This Economist article (not sure if registration is required, sorry):
http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=1447832
http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=1447832
Finally, the Shanghai Composite on July, 1997 was trading at 1189.76.
As of January 27, 2005 it's sitting at 1225.89.
That's an annualized return of roughly 0.4%.
The 5 year return is even worse (http://finance.yahoo.com/q/bc?s=^SSEC&amp;t=5y).
You haven't missed much :).
Apparently Yuganskneftegaz, which was sold to an independent buyer who turned out to be an apparatus of the state (yes, the same state that 1) forced Yukos to do the auction, and 2) ran the auction, not that 3) this is suspicious or anything), and which was then being bought with foreign assistance, is not being bought with foreign assistance.
As of this morning, at least.
Anyway, it looks like they're denying Chinese involvement to avoid a lawsuit , which is funny -- you'd think they might know someone in the Russian judiciary who could help them out.
Apparently Carly made a lot of journalistic enemies during her six hears at HP.
Not only was the catalyst for her fall from grace a Fortune article by Carol Loomis (who as far as I know is immortal -- she's been writing for Fortune since 1954), but the anti-Carly brigades are out in full force at Salon.com.
This is getting a little harsh; she might have messed up at HP (I refuse to call it by the new name, for now), but she wasn't actively trying to destroy a great company and wreck the shareholders.
It just, well, happened.
So, right, Carly was a bad manager, and she eventually got what she deserved, but she isn't evil incarnate.
I was hoping for another incredibly drawn-out story, full of antitrust drama, lurking potential bidders, and contentious confrontations between executives.
And then MCI just sort of accepted a Verizon deal without really bothering anybody.
Clearly, their corporate culture has suffered -- 25 years ago, MCI was the brawling upstart in the telecom industry, constantly challenging AT&T's right to exist, much less to monopolize the phone system.
And now, they're swallowed by Just Another Monolith.
I expected better -- meaner and tougher, sure, but better nonetheless.
Read this report on the U.S.-Russia Technology Symposium.
It's a great summary of the paradoxes of the Russian economy: They have a huge untapped supply of valuable IT labor, but their IT exports are only a tenth of their military exports (and only a thirtieth of India's IT exports).
They develop lots of new technology, but nobody can tell who owns what.
And, of course, their securities laws and property rights are even flimsier than China's -- after the Putin administration mugged Yukos on the grounds that it was too attractive a target to leave alone, they lost a lot of trust.
Still, they have an unbelieveable amount of untapped potential.
The following a grim story out of Russia tonight where there's proof some of the sailors on board that Russian nuclear submarine the Kursk initially survived the explosion that sank the sub, only to be trapped later.
One of the sailors wrote a letter during those terrible final hours.
Today, 10 weeks after a mysterious accident sent the Kursk to the bottom of the Barents sea, a grisly discovery.
In the pocket of one of the crew, a handwritten note, dying words of a sailor trapped alive in the sunken sub.
He is this lieutenant captain, seen here three years ago aboard the Kursk.
His last words tell a chilling tail -- tale of a desperate but future ill attempt to escape.
It now appears 23 survived -- survived the initial explosion.
The 23 frantically scrambled to the rear of the sub.
They find the escape hatch flooded and seal themselves in compartment nine.
Realizing he will die, he begins to write.
He addressed the letter to his wife, Olga.
He is my dear, dear beloved.
I want to see him again, read his letter.
The chilling account raises new questions and criticisms of the Russian navy, which waited several days before attempting to launch any rescue mission
But navy officials here at the Pentagon say any rescue attempt would have failed, that there really was no hope for the 23 survivors.
It's believed they would have frozen to death in hours, long before they ran out of air.
That may be little consolation for the families.
NBC News correspondent Jim Miklaszweski, the pentagon.
Program note here.
Coming up tonight at 10:00 p.m. eastern, a closer look at the Kursk and similar disasters that have taken place at sea.
An investigation is under way into a fatal airliner accident in Mexico last night.
It happened as the DC-9 was trying to land during a rainstorm.
The Aero Mexico jet skidded off a runway and into a neighborhood in the town of Reynosa, about 50 miles from Brownsville, Texas.
Four people on the ground were killed.
But the 83 people aboard the plane escaped with only scrapes and bruises.
We have been here so many times before the threat of a wider war in the middle east.
There has been impressive progress but a lasting past remains elusive.
President Clinton today considered flying to the middle east for an emergency summit meeting, but he backed away.
How did it come to this so swiftly?
Here's Andrea Mitchell.
Reporter:
The president returns to Washington today, hoping to salvage something from eight years of Middle East diplomacy.
What went wrong?
To many peace seemed so close at Camp David in July.
How did it all fall apart?
First, Palestinian resentment.
On the street, people see no economic rewards, aren't any better off after years of peace talks, and they resent the U.S. for blaming Arafat when the summit collapses while praising Israel's prime minister Barak.
The prime minister moved forward more from his initial position than chairman Arafat, particularly surrounding the questions of Jerusalem.
It's quite clear the Palestinians do not accept the various proposals put forward to divide Jerusalem.
Reporter:
Arafat appears weak, and radical groups like Hamas gain strength.
A weakened Arafat emboldens a great deal of forces that does not want peace.
Reporter:
Second, Israeli frustration.
Many Israelis feel Barak goes too far by offering Arafat partial control of the holy sites, gets nothing in return.
I think Barak was very forthcoming at Camp David.
The intransigence or failure of Arafat to come forward with any counterproposal I think frustrated the prime minister and frustrated the Israelis.
Reporter:
Finally, the summit raises false hopes, is not well prepared by Washington.
The U.S. rushes ahead, eager for a breakthrough before the end of Clinton's term.
Other Arab leaders like Mubarak of Egypt and Fahd of Saudi Arabia are not sold on the deal, tell Arafat to hold out.
If a concerted effort was put together to consult with these people and bring them on board, then probably Arafat would have been able to cut a deal.
I think the United States did not prepare adequately for Camp David.
They should have been much more careful in the preparation and more assured of getting some kind of an agreement.
Reporter:
With most observers saying that Camp David only made a bad situation worse, questions tonight as to why the president would even consider going to another summit with even less hope of a solution.
Washington.
With the presidential debate tonight in St. Louis, the candidates will be in the middle of a hot political issue that's not getting much national attention -- what to do about the Missouri river, the fabled waterway of Lewis and Clark that joins the Mississippi in St. Louis.
It's a far different river now than it once was, and the question is -- should it be allowed to return to its true form?
NBC's national correspondent is Jim Avila.
Reporter:
The wide Missouri, pioneers called it  -- too thick to drink, too thin to plow.
A shallow, slow moving, swampy river that birds and fish loved in its natural state.
The ebb and flow in a river like the Missouri provides the basis for life itself.
Reporter:
But the Missouri is no longer wild, tamed by dams and dredging.
Now a shipping highway the government says endangers the very existence of three critical river species -- the 100 million-year-old Pallid Sturgeon, the shore-wading the Least Tern.
The Missouri's natural rhythm destroyed, say the experts, by six dams in a system from north central Montana to the Mississippi River.
A transformation turning the meandering river into essentially a deep water ditch.
Without providing the higher flow in the spring and the lower flow in the summer that Missouri river species are adapted to, they're going to disappear.
Today's sturgeon can't reproduce in the river any more, only in man-made hatcheries and sand bars, homes to wading birds are being washed away by deep water.
So to save fish and birds and improve recreational use in up-river states, where tourism is a major source of income, the government wants to alter 50 years of steady water flow.
Re-creating the original river by releasing more water in spring, less in summer -- fighting words for downriver farmers and barge operators.
Try explaining that times have changed, nonsense to the people who live along the Missouri river and don't want to go back to the spring floods.
Reporter:
It's about the water and who controls it.
The Missouri, second longest river in the country.
7 states, 2,500 miles long and now according to conservationists, second on the list of rivers in danger.
Farmers say it's the planting season that's in danger if the Missouri isn't controlled in spring.
And barge owners say two dry months in the summer will ruin business.
What this proposal does is double the cost of operation on the Missouri river and will cause those companies to move off the river.
Reporter:
But according to figures from the U.S. Corps of Army Engineers, the four grain producing states along the Missouri, producing nearly 5 billion bushels of grain each year, ship very little by barge now.
16.7 million bushels.
That's .3%.
The barge companies do not own the Missouri river.
The flood plain farmers do not own the Missouri river.
Everybody owns it.
We have to find a way to share the Missouri.
Reporter:
And say environmentalists save three threatened  species and a leisure economy dependent upon a wide, untamed Missouri.
Jim Avila, NBC news, Bismarck, North Dakota.
Grief engulfed Austria, one day after a fire in a cable car filled with skiers killed at least 155 people.
It happened inside a tunnel high in the Austrian Alps.
Here's NBC's Ron Allen.
As helicopters carried emergency crews to the scene of the disaster nearly 100 Americans headed home to military bases in Germany, without eight members of their ski clubs who never came back.
Major Drew Stathis and his 8-year-old daughter say they might have been trapped, but they were just five minutes behind the group.
In the Army you kind of expect, prepare yourself.
But not on a family vacation.
That's where the tragedy is.
Lieutenant Mike Coe got tired of waiting for a train and left a family of four Americans who died, standing in line.
It is horrifying what happened to them.
And it is horrifying how close I was to -- I mean, I guess I'm a good, impatient American who did not want to wait in line.
Today this Alpine resort town came to an abrupt halt as more than 150 victims were all but positively identified.
Friends and relatives who'd been waiting and hoping were taken to a private memorial service.
Up the mountain the usually packed ski areas were completely deserted.
Investigators still haven't figured out what caused this disaster.
Several eyewitnesses have told them they saw flames coming from the train as it headed up the mountain, before it entered the tunnel.
One official here said, by the time the driver noticed the fire, it already was too late.
The main concern now is to remove and identify the victims.
These Americans ended a holiday weekend burdened by a deep sense of loss.
Nobody is looking forward to the long bus ride with our friends missing.
It's going to be hard.
Hard for this entire nation mourning the worst disaster here that anyone can remember.
Ron Allen, NBC News, Kaprun, Austria.
It's now been almost two months since the worst terror attack on a U.S. Navy ship, the destroyer "Cole," and tonight, sources tell NBC News that an American Muslim militant, a prime suspect in planning the attack, is now in custody in Jordan.
His name is Jaed Hijazi, and NBC News has learned he's got direct high-level ties to the terrorist Osama bin Laden.
He's reportedly told U.S. investigators of additional plans, to attack U.S. military aircraft in the Persian Gulf and Middle East.
I can't for the life of me figure out why anyone would invest in the airline industry.
Please, someone tell me a group companies facing more serious problems than the legacy airline carriers (Delta, US Airways, Continental, American, Northwestern, United).
High fuel costs, insane pension obligations, and a highly paid, specialized workforce.
To this list of woes, we add a whole slew of competitors with much lower cost structures.
I admit I've already taken advantage of the lower fares announced last week to book a business trip but these next few years are not going to be pretty for some of these companies.
Unfortunately, the pain is not limited to these companies.
Pittsburgh, one of US Airway's hubs, built up its airport complete with a sprawling retail complex in the terminal.
Now US Airways has reduced flights out of Pittsburgh by 28% since January of 2004 and is in real danger of folding completely.
These shiny new airports are usually financed by long-term bonds that still have to paid off.
..but not by the airlines.
This is an industry looking for a sustainable strategy.
Southwest and JetBlue were the only major airlines to earn a profit in 2004 but who knows what will be happening in another five years.
So I will thankfully accept the low fares, bemoan the loss of food on flights, and watch these companies parade in and out of bankruptcy.
BusinessWeek Online has some other commentary about the fare cuts here and about US Airway's woes here.
Thousands of people in Botswana have lined up to view the remains of an African man whose body was stuffed and exhibited in a Spanish museum for nearly a century.
The man was returned to Africa after complaints from the UN and other organizations that displaying his body was racist and offensive.
The man will be buried at a funeral service tomorrow.
You are listening to BBC news for The World.
I'm Gregor Craigy.
An apparent attack on a US warship has left at least six American sailors dead and about 35 injured.
The explosion came as the guided-missile destroyer USS Cole was refueling at a port in Yemen.
NPR's Chad Pergram reports.
Both the White House and the Pentagon said the attack appeared to be an act of terrorism.
President Clinton immediately whisked to the region investigative teams from the FBI, the Pentagon and the State Department.
The attack comes as US forces in the Middle East have been placed on a heightened state of alert after days of clashes between Israelis and Palestinians.
Defense Secretary William Cohen said the US would continue to protect its interests around the globe.
No one should doubt our resolve to remain a force for peace and for stability and no one should assume that they can force us to retreat.
No one should assume they can attack us with impunity.
The Cole had just arrived in the harbor for a refueling stop.
Officials say men aboard this small boat had been assisting the Cole with mooring lines just before the blast.
Chad Pergram ,NPR News, Washington.
The bodies of 2 more American sailors were recovered today from the USS Cole in the Yemeni port of Aden.
US officials are on the scene and continuing their investigations into the explosion that killed 17 crewmembers on board the Cole last Thursday.
Today there are reports that police in Aden questioned the landlord of an apartment where bomb-making equipment was found and whose occupants may have carried out the suicide attack against the warship.
Also today at the Cole's homeport in Norfolk, Virginia, President Clinton led a memorial service for those who died aboard the Cole.
The service began with the playing of the national anthem.
The President asked all Americans to take a moment to thank the men and women of the military.
Today we honor our finest young people, fallen soldiers who rose to freedom's challenge.
We mourn their loss, celebrate their lives, and offer the love and prayers of a grateful nation to their families.
Mr. Clinton mentioned the name of each of the 17 victims and praised the courage and character of the men and women who serve in the armed forces.
And he delivered this clear message for those who carry out attacks on members of US military.
For those who attacked them we say you will not found the safe harbor.
We will find you and justice will prevail.
America will not stop standing guard for peace, or freedom, or stability in the Middle East and around the world.
At the end of the somber ceremony, President Clinton asked everyone to join him in a moment of silence followed by the Navy Hymn and Taps.
Britain's going to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea.
Foreign Secretary Robin Cook made the announcement on his arrival in the South Korean capital, Seoul.
But Cook says establishing ties with North Korea doesn't mean London will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses in the country.
We have diplomatic relations around the world, we are going to find out who is a human rights breaker, we have very deep and very real concerns.
The advantage of having diplomatic relations is that we can have a direct dialogue in which we can raise these concerns and express our deep anxiety for the need of improvement in them.
Cook says the South Korean leadership is keen on international help in bringing its northern neighbor in from the cold.
Britain said today that it is normalizing relations with North Korea.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair called the decision a historic breakthrough.
It comes  just days ahead of Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's trip to the North Korean capital Pyongyang.
Britain's foreign minister Robin Cook, who made the announcement, said opening diplomatic links could help ease tensions between North and South Korea, technically the two countries are still at war.
Germany said today that it also plans to normalize relations with Pyongyang,
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation in Washington DC.
Mr. Harrison, Britain, Italy, prior to that Australia, the Philippines now and apparently Germany all bringing the most secretive state into the fold.
How about the United States, where does that leave us?
Well, I think President Clinton will get some good political cover.
From what Britain has done, if he goes to Pyongyang, as is now being discussed, Secretary Albright is going to go, the number two man in North Korea was in Washington last week.
Things are moving, what's particularly important is that Britain has not attached any conditions.
The United States has imposed a number of conditions on normalizing with North Korea.
The most important of them is that it renounce its missile program and its nuclear weapons program, or rather reach agreements on limiting and possibly ending them both, and as of now we are not in a position to normalize relations with North Korea just like that.
We will want negotiations on some of these contested issues.
Well let me ask you more about America's interest now and Britain's move, I mean how do you make sense of what's happening, especially if Britain was involved in a war with North Korea as obviously was the United States, and until recently North Korea was considered by the US a rogue nation.
It is still shrouded in secrecy, as we said, including in its nuclear weapons program.
Are you trusting of these newly forced alliances, do you consider what Britain is doing either reckless or ill advanced?
No.
And I don't think it is an alliance really, it is just conducting diplomatic interchange with them.
It is not even clear how soon Britain is going to have a mission in Pyongyang.
And so I think it certainly isn't reckless to establish diplomatic relations, and I think indeed it is a very healthy thing because the present leadership of Kim Jong Il, son of the late General You  , he has been trying to open up to the outside world.
He doesn't want to reform his internal economic system or political controls.
On the other hand he needs western capital, he needs supportive international agencies to deal with tremendous economic problems that North Korea has had since the end of the cold war, when they lost their Russian and Chinese economic subsidies.
So that trend of North Korea opening up to the outside, it seems to be, it should be encouraged.
So then as North Korea opens up more and more, what are the possible repercussions down the road for the nearly 40,000 American troops who remain in South Korea?
Well, North Korea's attitude has been that if the United States and North Korea are friends and the North Koreans don't feel threatened, they wont object to some US forces remaining in the Korean peninsula in a new role.
That is to say, if they are going to be there as allies of South Korea against North Korea, then the North Koreans don't want them there, they will keep putting on the pressure for the US to get the forces out.
The North Koreans are certainly not going to end their missile program, if the US continues to maintain some aspects of its military presence in the Korean peninsula such as its aircraft.
So I think they are going to ask for military concessions in order to do what we want them to do regarding missiles, but I think that the assumption that this improvement in ties between North and South and between North Korea and other countries is going to lead to the complete withdrawal of the US from Korea in the near future, certainly I don't think at all, are.
Mr. Harrison, thank you very much for speaking with us.
Thank you.
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation, speaking to us from Washington DC.
Missouri residents remembered Governor Mel Carnahan today.
He died Monday night in a plane crash while campaigning for the Senate.
Thousands attended a ceremony at the Missouri State capital.
President and Mrs. Clinton were among the mourners.
A former US Army sergeant has pleaded guilty in New York to conspiracy in the bombings of American Embassies in east Africa in 1998.
Ali Mohammed, a native of Egypt, has admitted to five charges of conspiring with a Saudi born dissident Osama bin Laden to attack US targets in the Middle-East.
More than 220 people died in the blasts.
Libyan leader Colonel Gadaffi can be prosecuted in France over the bombing of a French airliner in which a 170 people were killed.
That's the ruling of a court in Paris.
It rejected an appeal that as a serving head of state Gadaffi should be immune from prosecution.
The lawyer representing the victims' families Francoise Rudetski is hailing the decision as a victory.
The victory today is that any people who committed an act of terrorism should know that he can be pursued and could be arrested and there is no immunity for anyone, any leaders in the world.
Relatives of those killed after an explosion on board the plane over Niger in 1989, brought the case against the Libyan leader.
Six Libyans including Colonel Gadaffi's brother-in-law have already been tried in their absence.
This is The World.
I am Lisa Mullins.
Putting aside a half century of acrimony, Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright met today with North Korea's leader Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang.
Part of the purpose of this historic visit is to lay the groundwork for a possible trip to North Korea by President Clinton before his term ends.
Albright's visit to Pyongyang is the first by a high level US official since the communist state was established in 1948.
Kong Dan Oh is a Korean expert who has just written a book called 'North Korea through the Looking Glass'.
She is now in the South Korean capital of Seoul.
We know that the visit is making big news there in Seoul.
Can you tell us what is being reported about the meeting between the two sides from the South Korean perspective?
Well, when I look at about six major daily newspapers, basically the top news was Madeleine Albright meeting with the Chairman Kim Jong Il.
And basically that indeed this is a very historic event, and some kind of euphoria and very positive upbeat feeling.
But at the same time, the reports are basically telling the importance of this meeting that is that they have to talk about the very critical security matter issues such as missile and nuke.
But nonetheless, the meeting was very crucial, so I think all in all, it was a very positive beginning.
And how much of South Korea as you mentioned is bordering on euphoria, get this new relationship with Pyongyang and at the visit by Secretary of State Albright?
I know that you have taken a more cautious approach, and I wonder if that applies to Secretary Albright's visit in general?
Do you believe that the US is doing the right thing?
Or is perhaps the United States, in your view, moving too quickly to try and patch things up?
I am kind of taking a slightly cautious approach, simply because if Madam Albright is there, without the really thinking down the road some kind of strategic consequences of this meeting, simply because we are interested in seeing this gentleman and maybe before our term is over, let me meet you.
I think that kind of simple approach to be wrong.
But if she understands importance of this meeting and further brings up substance of issue to be resolved between the North Korea and the United States, I think that is very desirable.
What you're saying is that you feel that the part of the impetus of the North is influenced by the fact that the United States has a presidential election just a couple of weeks away.
I think that is a definitely correct statement, provided that maybe the Republican candidate, Mr. Bush to be elected.
North Korea was very, very scared that Mr. Bush would take a much more hawkish and conservative approach.
So before this Clinton administration comes to be over, they would like to lay down the ground rules and kind of create some kind of positive improvement to deal with the United States.
And obviously one of the most important agendas for tomorrow is to discuss the possibilities of President Clinton's next visit sometime in November.
I know that you have concerns about how a potential visit by President Clinton might be portrayed within North Korea itself.
Why is that a concern of yours?
My fundamental belief is that Kim Jong Il has not really made his mind or made a decision to push the reforms, even in the session of 1978 Chinese reform that was taken by Deng Xiaoping.
He is now gambling, he is trying, but he has not really changed his manner or his policy whatsoever.
His economy and his society's politics is really getting in real deep trouble.
He has to show his power and he's been telling his people that I am the true leader and the world is afraid of us.
All the imperialist capitalist is afraid of us.
That we are the center of the universe.
Without the North Korea, the globe is not existing.
Let me show you that I am the true leader and they will come to our country to pay visit, courtesy visit for me.
And so now Putin visited, President Kim visited, Jiang Zemin will visit next year and the President Clinton will go.
Domestic consumption of this visit will be immense, without changing any policy toward the freedom of proliferation  .
Is it really possible with the kind of close watch that the outside world is now going to be invited to give to North Korea, that Kim Jong Il could actually not change a thing in terms of his policies, internally or externally?
I am exactly wondering like you, and I think that there is a maybe the possibility actually is going up.
So I don't object really any of these like U.K. normalization, you know.
I don't have any objection.
But only when the leaders and the elite, the policy elite, is aware of that what they are bringing and what they are negotiating and how they would like to have an impact on North Korean society, I think that's the important key question.
Kong Dan Oh is the author of the book 'North Korea through the Looking Glass', speaking to us from Seoul, South Korea.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World service, PRI and WGBH in Boston.
I'm Lisa Mullins.
American spy suspect Edmund Pope took the stand again today in a Moscow courtroom.
The former naval intelligence officer faces charges of stealing secret designs for a high-speed Russian torpedo system.
Pope denies acting illegally and President Clinton and Secretary Of State Madeleine Albright have called for his release on health grounds but Russian prosecutors are pressing ahead as The World's Nenad Sebek reports from Moscow.
The trial was suspended earlier in the week because of Pope's poor health.
Pope has a history of bone cancer but a doctor working for the FSB, the Russian security service, pronounced Pope fit enough to stand trial today.
The proceedings are held behind closed doors and Pope's lawyer said today that his client is still very weak and that he wants a new interpreter, says the current one works for the same agency that has charged Pope.
The lawyer Pavel Astakhov says his client is innocent when it comes to espionage.
The whole case as Astakhov claims is an exercise in politics.
This is the first time in almost 40 years that a foreign national is being tried for espionage.
It's quite blatant.
Officials from the security force, which used to be the KGB, are openly boasting about taking an American citizen to court.
Way back in 1961 US military pilot Garry Powers was tried and sentenced but later on exchanged for a captured Soviet spy.
But Powers was caught red-handed.
His U2 spy plane was brought down by Soviet Air Defenses.
Pope was arrested as he was trying to purchase blue prints for what he says is a 10-year-old underwater propulsion system or as the prosecutions claims ultra modern, secret Russian torpedoes.
Former Russian Army Intelligence Officer, Vitaly Schlykov says Pope could easily have been a victim of the Russian obsession with secrets.
We have of course a secrecy culture in this country for decades and decades and reminisce of it are coming to the surface in this case.
The laws on secrecy are still intact from the times of the Soviet Union.
Guilty or not, Pope is being held under a very harsh regime in the Moscow Lefortovo prison where his wife Sherry visited him last week.
We took two pictures of our grandson and they won't let him keep the pictures and I took a coat and gloves and they wouldn't let him have those, but we did get to embrace and we did get to talk about our family for one hour.
Prison rules say that an inmate can only receive approved gifts on the first and third Thursday in a month.
And Sherry Pope's short-term visa didn't enable her to stay that long.
She says she even appealed to the Russian President.
Ed's mother and I both wrote letters to President to ask him to please take into consideration that Ed is 54 years old and that we want him home.
Military intelligence analyst Vitaly Schlykov says Putin is probably caught between a rock and a hard place when it comes to the American's trail.
I'm sure that it came unexpected for Putin.
He wouldn't have approved on a case like this because politically it is very harmful but he came from the ranks of the FSB himself.
He has to pretend that he is sticking to his guns in this case.
In Schlykov's opinion, Pope is likely to get convicted.
But he believes that immediately after the sentencing Pope is likely to be pardoned by Moscow.
US Congressman John Peterson, who has been championing Pope's cause, says he fears that might be too late for Pope.
The main thing we have been pushing for months is health care.
Earlier we had asked for an American doctor to see him.
When they continued to say no then we found Russian doctors.
The judge delayed the trial for a day and a half so we could furnish her with a list of doctors and hospitals in Moscow and after we provided that information she said no.
Pope's lawyer Pavel Astakhov says that what the authorities here call medical care is a joke.
In Pope's case medical control means everyday testing for his suspected cancer.
What they do here is take his blood pressure and temperature.
The very least they could do is take blood tests and bone marrow tests.
The court has even rejected our demand for medical expertise to establish whether he is fit to stand trial.
As Strakovs says he does not trust the Judge Nina Barkova at all.
He says she has rejected almost every one of his 40 objections and suggestions during the trail so far.
Strakovs is now trying to arrange for fresh witnesses for his defense of Edmund Pope, but is not hopeful that even that will be granted by the court.
For The World, this is Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
In Moscow, today there was a dramatic plot twist in a real life courtroom drama.
A lawyer for US spy suspect, Edmond Pope said that the main prosecution witness has retracted his testimony.
According to Pope's attorney the witness said he provided the evidence under pressure from the Russian Secret Service.
Ever since Pope was arrested 7 months ago, the American businessmen has denied charges that he was gathering secret information on a new high-speed Russian torpedo.
The World's Nenad Sebek is following the trial in Moscow.
Nenad, go back and tell us just how we got here?
Who is Edwin Pope and why is he on trial in Russia?
Well, Edwin Pope is a retired American intelligence officer and that's sort of speaks against him when it comes to the Russian public and certainly the Russian court.
He has claimed that he is now just an innocent businessman, who was dealing with the Russian businesses orbit in the Defense Industry.
He has, however, claimed that he is only dealing with the de-classified military material and that when it comes to these torpedoes that we are talking about, that he was buying an underwater propulsion system, which is 10-years old.
What the Russian prosecution is claiming is that Pope was actually after ultramodern secret high-speed Russian torpedoes.
Okay, so tell us what happened in the trial this morning and bring in this professor from one of Moscow's elite universities who is a key witness?
The big news of today was that Pope's attorney distributed to journalists this morning a letter, which he says was written by Anatoly Babkin, who is a Professor at Moscow's Bauman Technical Institute, who until now was considered to be the main witness for the prosecution.
He says that he gave that evidence under pressure having had a grave heart condition proceeding a heart attack.
Professor Babkin says that he never actually met Edwin Pope face to face, nor has he given him any kind of sensitive information, therefore, his former testimony is to be considered as not corresponding to reality says this letter by Professor Babkin.
However, the court today again, this is what we were told by Pope's lawyer, has decided not to accept this change in testimony.
The court said that Professor Babkin had ample opportunities to appear in the court.
What is not clear at this moment is that whether it will allow a personal appearance by Professor Babkin, in which he could sort of say what he said in this letter.
Then I would assume that the Professor is still ailing.
I mean, is he able to take the stand, is there any indication that he will be asked to?
No he is not able to take the stand at the moment.
He is recuperating after a heart attack, but Pope's lawyer has said that court session could actually take place in the apartment of Professor Babkin.
We still have to wait and see whether the court will accept that.
So how important is this evidence?
I mean how pivotal a figure is he?
Is he providing evidence of no one else can?
Well.
From what we have heard so far, this is supposed to be like a key witness, a very important witness, but then the first reaction came from the FSB, the Federal Security Bureau, which is the former KGB, they are the ones who are prosecuting Pope.
Their spokesman said today that their evidence is far from being based only on Babkin's testimony.
He said that FSB has evidence given by other witnesses and experts, as well as, written documents and videos.
This is not, what would know as a standards of American style trial certainly, first of all of the proceedings are conducted entirely in secret.
What is the defense attorney for Edmond Pope saying about the conduct in the trial?
Well.
He is very unhappy with the main judge.
Pope is not being tried by Jury.
He has been tried by panel of judges headed by judge Nina Barkova and what we have heard from the defense attorney Pavel Astakhov is that she has rejected almost every single one of over 40 objections and suggestions that he has so far submitted during the case.
He is very unhappy with the way she has been conducting the whole case and also with the fact that she has denied Edmund Pope the proper medical attention that he has asked for.
And what has like that it happened should Edmond Pope get convicted.
Would he actually serve time?
Well.
Most of the people I have spoken here believe that that would not be the case, that since the case is already being brought to court that he is most likely to get convicted, but will then afterwards be pardoned either by the president or the parliament, and then sent back home for reasons of ill health, but most people here do expect a conviction at the end of this trial.
It was Nenad Sebek in Moscow talking to us about the espionage trial in Moscow of American Edmond Pope.
Thank you very much Nenad.
You are welcome Lisa.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
A court in Moscow has convicted American businessman Edmund Pope of spying and sentenced him to 20 years in prison.
Pope, a retired naval officer from Pennsylvania, was accused of illegally obtaining secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
He argued throughout the case that the information he obtained was already available to the public.
The White House denounced the court action calling it unjustified and wrong.
Pope's wife and his lawyers have also called for his release on health grounds, saying that he suffers from a rare form of bone cancer, which may have returned during his eight months in a Russian prison.
Corey Flintoff, NPR News, Washington.
A court in Moscow today sentenced American businessman Edmund Pope to 20 years in jail.
Pope, a former naval officer, was found guilty of collecting secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and he had a powerful ally.
President Clinton had appealed for clemency for Pope on health grounds and had brought the case up with Russian President Vladimir Putin, but Mr. Clinton's pleas apparently fell on deaf ears.
The Russian court today handed down the maximum sentence.
Still, The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow says that Pope has not yet exhausted his legal options.
He has got 7 days to appeal this particular sentence.
There is also the possibility of asking for a presidential pardon, Pope has actually indeed already done that.
It's just that his wife said that she has not heard neither from the President nor his office.
His health is a big issue as well, isn't it?
Yes, Pope has been suffering from a rare bone cancer in the past and he has been consistently complaining about his health ever since last Spring when he was taken in to the Lefortovo prison.
The thing is that he has not been allowed any access to American doctors and even to Russian doctors of his own choosing.
He has been examined by the Russian doctors in the Lefortovo prison but they have just said that his complaints are unfounded and that it might be a case of severe rheumatism or something like that.
They are not sort of allowing the possibility of his bone cancer reoccurring.
One of the things that has been said here is that Mr. Pope may have run afoul of a changing mood in Russia about what kind of military and security information might be made available to the west for business purposes.
That his intentions were innocent to begin with, but the times changed and what he did began to look more and more like espionage.
That is certainly a possibility but we don't know actually precisely because we don't even know what the initial charges are.
The whole trial was held behind closed doors and the details of the accusations against Pope have never been fully released.
We know that the prosecution claimed that he was trying to purchase secret plans for a top-secret high-speed Russian torpedo.
He was claiming all the time, and his lawyer was saying that he was sort of trying to purchase plans that had been actually out in the open but we do not know the precise legals of that.
That is one of the possibilities.
Another thing which is mentioned here is that Pope simply ran afoul of a new trend in Russia which was a trend where the security services were getting the upper hand where they were trying to prove that they are actually doing their job, that they are catching spies, that they are getting convictions.
We have, for example, today's reaction by General Alexander Zdanovich, he is the head of the FSB support programs.
He was very, very brief in his comments after the sentencing.
He said that the court has said that FSB investigators have acted correctly and in accordance with the law and he says, "Russia has its secrets, we will do our best to protect them".
Maybe Pope simply ran afoul of such attempts by the Russian Security Services to show that they are doing their job.
Putin, on the one hand, is certainly trying to show that he is in charge and that no one from the outside is going to get away with anything.
By the same token though he is not eager to run afoul of the United States and the State Department is very upset.
Is there any possibility that Mr. Putin might consider a pardon?
I would say there is a very strong possibility of that.
We know that President Clinton has spoken to Vladimir Putin about this when they met last time, and certainly the Secretary of State Madeleine Albright has brought up the issue a number of times, as has the State Department indeed with the Russian Foreign Ministry.
In a curious way the sentencing of Edmund Pope might be the beginning of an end of this ordeal for him.
Because now that there is a sentence, once the judiciary process is started, once the FSB brought him to trial everybody here expected that the trial will end and that it will end with a conviction.
But now that this judicial process is over there is a very, very strong likelihood, that's the feeling here in Moscow that President Vladimir Putin might pardon Edmund Pope.
There is a good reason for that, his ill health.
So it would be a nice humanitarian gesture and a way of offering a friendly hand to the west and to the United States in particular.
The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
Thanks a lot, Nenad.
You are welcome.
The United States is hoping that Russia's President Vladimir Putin will follow the advice of his special commission and pardon Edmund Pope.
This week the American businessman began serving a 20-year prison sentence in Moscow after being convicted of spying.
Specifically Russian prosecutors charged that Pope had stolen secrets relating to a high-speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and Washington backed him up.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha, did the Presidential Pardons Commission give any reason for their decision?
It gave several reasons.
I am not sure if those were the formal reasons but members of the commission have been interviewed today by various outlets and they say that they were afraid of the spy mania rising in Russia, that they thought it was really suspicious to them that Edmund Pope was sentenced to the maximum term, whereas the article of the law had 10 to 20 years.
He was sentenced to 20, even though according to the members of the Pardon Commission, the evidence that was presented by the prosecution was far from quotient.
They also said this court did not give the lawyers for the defense due procedure.
The court listened to the defense much less than it did to the prosecution.
Much of this sounds less like a pardon and more like a criticism of the number of institutions that Mr. Putin also has to show some support of,  including his court system and his police and his prosecutors.
How is he going to respond to this and when?
I don't think anybody knows and I don't think anybody will know until President Putin has responded.
It is his decision.
According to the Russian law the Pardon Commission, after it has made its decision, sends it to the President and it's up to him whether to endorse it or not to say no.
One last question for you, Marsha.
He does have a lot to balance doesn't he, President Putin?
Not only the institutions I mentioned but the need to keep things somehow free of tension.
Is this case likely to strain US-Russian relations?
I'm afraid it might.
Recently the Russian policy toward the US has fallen into a line where Russia tries to demonstrate force it once had but no longer does.
It wants to put an end to what is regarded by the current Russian government as humiliation of the past years.
There were numerous attempts to be a source of minor troubles even though Russia can no longer be a source of scare to the west and among such instances there were several, there was just recently flying over by Russian military planes over Kitty Hawk, an American warship.
There is also a scandal that erupted over Russia's declaration that it will sell weapons to Iran, contrary to the earlier made agreement.
Such examples are quite a few already, some of them are combined with material profits for Russia but not necessarily.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of the Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha,  thank you very much for speaking with us.
Pleasure.
Edmund Pope tasted freedom today for the first time in more than eight months.
Pope is the American businessman who was convicted last week on spying charges and sentenced to 20 years in a Russian prison.
He denied any wrongdoing.
Russian President Vladimir Putin pardoned him for health reasons.
Pope was flown to the U.S. military base at Ramstein, Germany.
He will spend the next several days at the medical center there before he returns home with his wife Sherry.
Pope was in remission from a rare form of bone cancer when he was arrested in Russia.
Doctors will examine him for signs that the cancer may have come back while he awaiting trial in a Russian jail.
A spokeswoman said that Pope was suffering from malnutrition and high blood pressure.
Congratulations from foreign leaders poured into the governor's mansion in Texas today.
The messages were addressed to President-elect George W. Bush and they all contained words of welcome and optimism.
But truth be told for most international figures, Bush is something of an unknown.
He has traveled little and his diplomatic experience is limited to contacts with Mexican officials during his tenure as governor.
The World's Jeb Sharp has been hunting down clues to the foreign policy of the incoming administration.
A few broad foreign policy themes emerged during the campaign.
Chief among them are debate over the wisdom of US intervention.
Bush clearly favors limiting the use of American force and troops to solve conflicts overseas.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says that view is consistent with the philosophies of two top Bush advisors, Russia expert Condoleezza Rice and retired General Colin Powell.
Certainly, Condoleezza Rice, certainly Colin Powell who I expect, the two of them to be the dominant force in the next administration on foreign policy.
I certainly think they believe they would like to not intervene as much as the Clinton administration or I guess the previous Bush administration did.
In fact, Condoleezza Rice who is slated to become Bush's National Security Advisor has already said she'd like to see US troops pulled home from the Balkans.
But, Robert Kagan says its one thing for Bush's advisors to state a philosophy, its quite another to implement it.
I think they may find the world has a way of intruding itself and that it won't be that easy to pull forces out of the Balkans for instance, without destroying the NATO alliance.
After Rice made some comments about having a new division of labor, I think that was the word she used with regard to NATO and peacekeeping issues, there was a riot in Europe and the real fears that the United States was getting ready to withdraw from the continent and I think they had to walk that back a little bit.
The Balkans is just one example where the Bush administration will have to walk a fine line in delineating a different approach from that of Mr. Clinton.
The foreign policy challenges facing the next President are daunting.
The Mid East peace process is on hold with Israelis and Palestinians practically at war.
The sanctions regime against Iraq has unraveled.
Russia and China are alarmed at the prospect of America beefing up its missile defenses.
India and Pakistan, now nuclear powers are locked in a dangerous standoff.
Stability in East Asia is another pressing concern.
But despite the challenges, Northeast Asia expert Bates Gil of the Brookings Institution is encouraged by what he knows of the Bush foreign team.
One of the most interesting aspects of the new likely team under the Bush administration is first of all, extensive experience in defense and military affairs.
Secondly, it's easy to point to a number of persons who will have leading positions who have had extensive experience in East Asian affairs.
So you have a combination of depth of experience plus an understanding of the region.
Both of which will come in handy if there is a crisis with China over Taiwan or relations with North Korea deteriorate.
In such a crisis, Bush is likely to rely on the advice of government officials who cut their teeth during the cold war.
Some critics like Gore advisor Bruce Jentelson worry that the Bush team will be out of step with today's issues.
Issues related to globalization, global public health, technology, and those challenges.
Yet in my view a truly realistic policy cannot be based only on the old agenda issues, really has to address these new agenda issues as well.
But no matter what sort of expertise Bush's international affairs people bring to the White House, they won't be able to fully control what happens on their watch.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says each President's foreign policy is ultimately shaped by events, not theories.
Really, most of a President's foreign policy comes down to how they respond to specific events.
Bill Clinton did not come in to office intending to send troops to Haiti and the Balkans, and events sort of forced his hand and I think that, you know, the truth is Bush administration comes in with certain kinds of prejudices, but we will have to see how they respond to crises.
And the only thing that I'm confident of is that there will be crises.
President-elect Bush is expected to begin naming his top cabinet picks in the next few days.
Those choices will mean everything when the first crisis rolls around.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
In 1998, the United States voted against the creation of the World's first permanent International War Crimes Court.
President Clinton still has a chance to sign the treaty creating the Court before a final deadline this Sunday.
Advocates are pressing him to do just that, but Conservatives in Congress and Pentagon officials don't want the US to join the treaty.
The World's Jeb Sharp explains why.
Jesse Helms, the Conservative and powerful Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has made it clear the Rome's statuette would be dead on arrival if it were brought to Congress for ratification.
But proponents of the permanent International Criminal Court would still like to see President Clinton at least sign the treaty before the New Year's eve deadline.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Clinton's signature would be an important symbolic gesture.
What he will accomplish is making a clear statement that the United States not only in the former Yugoslavia, not only in Rwanda, not only in Cambodia, not only in Sierra Leone, where the administration has supported efforts at justice, but worldwide the United States supports the rule of law and supports holding those accused of genocide to account under the highest standards of due process.
But the opposition here in the United States is intense.
It comes mainly from the Pentagon where US military officials fear the Court will leave Americans vulnerable to politically motivated prosecutions.
Negotiators have tried to include safeguards in the treaty to address those fears, but stop short of exempting US personnel from prosecution.
John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute shares the Pentagon's objections.
I think there is every prospect such a court and its prosecutor would be highly politicized and the principal target of a court like this might well turn out to be the United States or Israel or other countries like that.
Bolton says that almost happened at the War Crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague, when Chief Prosecutor Carla Delponte briefly contemplated an investigation of NATO's bombing campaign against Serbia in 1999.
But proponents of the court say it's healthy for the United States and its allies to come under the same scrutiny as other countries.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Delponte's handling of the NATO case was exemplary.
Carla Delponte was acting as any responsible prosecutor must when she receives credible allegations of wrongdoing.
She looked into those allegations and then after an appropriate investigation she dismissed them.
Richard Dicker says President Clinton should keep the promise he made to the Rwandan people in 1998 when he told survivors of the genocide there the United States would support the International Court.
But John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute says a Clinton signature in the face of stiff domestic opposition would be meaningless.
I think it's a symbolic act that doesn't achieve much, but I don't think anybody internationally should think that whatever President Clinton does will have the slightest impact on the next administration.
Despite American objections, the International Criminal Court enjoys wide support worldwide and among major US allies.
131 countries have signed the treaty, 7 today and 25 have ratified it.
60 nations in all must ratify the treaty for the International Criminal Court to come into existence.
That's expected to happen, with or without US support, in 2002.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
Got job?
And so, I have rejoined the world of the fully employed.
After Christmas, I got a call from the wife of one of my former bosses (at my last full-time job).
She was looking for a Development Assistant at the retirement community where she works.
I started here 4 weeks ago.
WM is affiliated with, but not run or fully supported by, the denomination I've been a part of all my life (UMC).
My grandmother (who was Baptist) lived here for a few months before she died in 1995, so I have many connections to the job.
Our offices are in one of the patio homes, and I have my own lovely office with a window.
The job's only about 12 miles from home, and I'm going against the bulk of the traffic mornings and afternoons.
It all seems perfect and yet.
.. Oh, I'm so thankful to be somewhere so nice where I might actually make a difference in people's lives, and I want to keep an open mind and hope it'll last forever, but I have a feeling I'll be restless within a year or so.
My boss is a very nice person, but conservative and resistant to technology, i.e. computers, internet, etc.
We just got new computers a week and half ago, and she's griping about XP (her old OS was Windows 98--mine was 95, so I'm thrilled with the new stuff).
I tell her it'll just take some getting used to.
We'll see.
I'm not making the kind of salary I was hoping to get, but it's the best salary I've gotten thus far.
When I was fulltime in radio I made a little less, but I got quite a few remotes, which make up for not getting a topnotch salary.
I'm still doing my TV announcing and my weekend radio stuff, so that money will help.
I'm going to start actively pursuing more voice work in the next month or so, too.
My plan is to pay off my car early, and then work on the other debts.
I think it's time to go on and fill out the adoption applications.
I'm terrified of more debt, but Mom and Dad will help with the money.
I'm not sure they realize how expensive it all is.
I'm thinking we might lean toward adopting from Guatemala, but we've still not hashed it all out.
It's almost bad making some money now, because while most of me wants to save as much as possible, the other, smaller part is screaming loudly for stuff, stuff, stuff!!!
I've got a trial subscription to XM at work because of the Dell computers, and now I'm lusting to have it all of the time.
G got me a nice office stereo for my birthday and it does have an aux jack, so I could listen to it here.
He asked if I wanted a car stereo, and I said no, but I do.
There are so many things I want.
A garage.
A dining room set.
New stuff for our house.
New clothes.
New everything.
But I want family more.
I think part of the draw of the other stuff is I could get it now.
But I'd be paying for it later.
Money makes the world go round and round and round til I'm just dizzy.
A Moscow court has denied a request by US spy suspect Edmond Pope for a medical examination, despite his rare bone cancer.
Mr. Pope's condition has gone untreated since he was jailed five months ago.
Russia accuses the former US naval intelligence officer of illegally obtaining secrets about a high-tech Russian torpedo.
On Friday the court denied a series of defense motions that also included a request to tape the proceedings and replace the court translator, who works for Russian security.
The trial opened Wednesday and has been suspended until Monday.
Ivory Coast's army has pledged its loyalty to opposition candidate Loran Gbagbo.
The pledge followed a tumultuous 24 hours that ended the rule of the junta, which seized power last December.
Soldiers and civilians took to the streets to celebrate the departure of junta leader General Robert Guei.
In an address on state television, Wednesday, Mr. Gbagbo, leader of the Ivorian Socialist party, said he would be forming a cabinet shortly.
A Russian scientist has told a Moscow City court that the information an American businessman allegedly tried to purchase about a Russian torpedo is commonly available and not a state secret.
The scientist, an expert on the torpedo and a defense witness at the trial of businessman Edmond Pope said he had often used the torpedo information for his research and had spoken openly about it.
A defense lawyer said the testimony would help his client.
In Yemen, a bomb threat has forced the tightening of security at the hotel housing US investigators probing the attack on the USS Cole.
Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon told reporters the situation caused the Secretary of Defense to call US field commanders.
The Secretary held a video conference call with all the commanders in chiefs, as well as the service chiefs and the service secretaries and the topic was force protection.
The hotel has been hosting scores of investigators who are looking into the apparent suicide bomb attack on the navy destroyer that killed 17 US sailor two weeks ago.
The US Navy destroyer damaged apparently by a terrorist bomb while refueling at the Red Sea port Aden has begun its journey back to the States for repair.
As Dave Gavlak reports, the USS Cole was towed out of the Aden harbor to awaiting Norwegian transport ship, that will actually carry the damaged destroyer home.
The American national anthem played as four tug boats pulled the USS Cole slowly out of Yemen's Southern port of Aden.
The Cole was badly damaged two weeks ago in an apparent suicide bombing that killed 17 US sailors.
Security was tight as the ship was towed out.
American and Yemeni patrol boats mounted with machine guns escorted the Cole out to open waters while American helicopters flew overhead.
Some Yemenis expressed relief to see the ship leave.
Many locals said they feared the bombing of the ship would serve as an excuse for continued US military presence in the Gulf country.
Diplomats and analysts have commented that a joint investigation into the attack may in fact strengthen ties between the world super power and the poor, but strategic Arab state.
US and Yemeni officials say they believe Islamic militants may have carried out the bombing.
So far two little known Islamic groups have claimed responsibility for the attack.
Yemeni authorities claimed they have detained over 70 people for questioning.
These include some Afghan-Arab volunteers who came to Yemen after fighting against Soviet forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Dave Gavlak for VOA News, Cairo.
And this is VOA News now.
I'm Tom Crosby.
As we have been reporting, the White House confirms Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat are going to meet separately with President Clinton later this week.
Meanwhile, there has been continued trouble in the streets of West Bank and the Gaza Strip with at least two more Palestinians killed, Sunday in clashes with Israeli troops.
Laurie Kassman reports the trouble came despite an impassioned plea from Prime Minister Barak that Mr. Arafat rein in the rioters and return to the negotiating table.
On Saturday, Palestinians reported more than 30 injuries.
But reports of the fighting also talked of a drop in the level of violence, since both sides agreed to a cease-fire late Wednesday night.
More than 170 Palestinians have died and more than 6000 are reported to have been wounded in clashes with the Israeli military.
Several Israeli soldiers and civilians have also been killed.
Shopkeepers in East Jerusalem are being urged to close their doors to protest against the killing of two Palestinian teenagers on Friday, Southeast of Jerusalem.
Both Arab and Israeli businesses are suffering from the latest violence.
A shopkeeper in the Arab town of Jaffa, which is adjacent to Tel Aviv, complains that few Israelis venture into the area since clashes erupted there a few weeks ago.
Jaffa is usually bustling with Israeli and foreign tourists.
All our work is dependent totally on the Jews.
If they are not coming, so really we cannot work.
I mean, what happens that the Arabs here, the 20,000 Arabs in is dependent on the Jews going to their market and the Jews coming here.
So we cannot live, I mean, we are really totally paralyzed right now.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat have agreed to meet separately with US President Bill Clinton to see how to ease tensions and get the peace process back on track.
The meetings will take place later in the week after the US presidential vote on Tuesday.
Laurie Kassman, VOA News, Jerusalem.
US Defense Secretary William Cohen plans to travel next week to nine Middle Eastern Gulf states for meetings with regional leaders.
Mr. Cohen will depart next Tuesday to visit Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Israel, Jordan and Egypt.
The Pentagon says, the Secretary will consult with defense officials in those countries and also visit US troops in the area.
US forces in the Gulf have been on high alert, since last month's apparent terrorist bombing of the USS Cole, which killed 17 sailors.
An explosion struck the Cole, as it refueled in the Yemeni port of Aden.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair arrives in Russia today for talks with Vladimir Putin on security, foreign policy, and economic issues.
They are also expected to discuss a new Russian proposal for deep cuts in US and Russian long-range missiles.
VOA's Larry James in Moscow.
The highlight of the one-day visit will be three hours of talks on Tuesday, during which Mr. Blair and Mr. Putin will focus on a wide range of issues including Russia's latest call for cutting the number of strategic nuclear warheads to below 1500.
President Clinton has said such a deal is possible, but that it will be first necessary to convince Moscow of the merits of America's proposed Missile Defense System.
The US wants to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty so it can develop such a system.
Russia believes such a move could spark a new arms race and has threatened to tear up existing weapons agreements and stop disarmament talks if the United States goes ahead.
On Sunday Mr. Putin called on the Russian parliament to quickly ratify the amended Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty.
That treaty requires Russia to make further non-nuclear weapons reductions in some areas of the country including breakaway Chechnya.
President Putin acknowledged that Russia is still violating its commitment in Chechnya, but he said it is only a temporary situation which has the ultimate aim of cutting armaments in the region.
He also thanked the 29 other signatories to the treaty for their understanding.
He said Russia is fully behind the agreement that, he said, is an efficient instrument of ensuring security in Europe for years to come.
The original treaty was signed in 1990 and led to the destruction of thousands of heavy weapons by NATO and the former Warsaw Pact.
Tony Blair became the first western leader to come to Russia to meet the new President last March even before Mr. Putin was elected.
The Russian leader returned the favor by making London one of his first foreign destinations after taking office.
The two have already met four times this year.
Analysts here in Moscow believe Britain can play a useful role as a bridge to both Europe and the United States.
Trade is also expected to figure significantly in the talks.
Britain ranks as the third largest investor after the United States and Germany with just slightly more than $1 billion invested in Russia.
Larry James, VOA News, Moscow.
More than 50 people are dead in Nigeria, after a leaking oil pipeline burst into flames outside the commercial capital, Lagos.
The blast and resulting fire Thursday, ripped through an area near a fuel-loading depot owned by the state-run Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
Witnesses report seeing burnt bodies littering the charred grounds while many other victims are being treated for injuries sustained in the blaze.
A spokeswoman for the Petroleum Company says the fire was caused by vandals.
The Voice of America presents differing points of view on a wide variety of issues.
Next, an editorial expressing the policies of the United States government.
For nearly 20 years, the world has faced the challenge posed by AIDS.
Since 1988, the first day of December has been designated by the United Nations as World AIDS Day.
This is the time to disseminate information and faster cooperation in the battle against AIDS, the number one cause of infectious disease in the world.
The picture of the epidemic is bleak.
According to a new UN study, in the past year over five million people have been infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Since the beginning of the epidemic, about 22 million people have died of the disease.
While infections among adults are decreasing, infections among children are increasing.
Many of these cases are in sub-Saharan Africa where infected mothers are transmitting the virus to their babies during delivery.
Africa accounts for more than four-fifths of the world's AIDS-related deaths.
In some African countries, one out of four adults is infected with HIV.
But Eastern Europe has seen the biggest explosion of new infections.
In Russia, the rate of infection has more than doubled this year to 300,000.
South and Southeast Asia are other high-risk areas with five and three quarter million adults and children now living with HIV or AIDS.
In too many places, discussion of AIDS is taboo and the disease is shrouded in mystery and misinformation.
But as the grim statistics make clear, it is critical that the governments and citizens of those nations most affected by AIDS, do their part to recognize the scope of the epidemic and act decisively to confront it.
As President Bill Clinton said, we must work together to break the silence, to fight the stigmatization and protect the rights of those living with HIV and AIDS, and to help those infected find the care and treatment they need.
We must pledge to stay the course in our crusade until the world is finally freed from the shadow of this devastating epidemic.
Welcome to another hour of news and information on the Voice of America.
I'm David Chadwick, with VOA News now.
The death toll in Colombia from three days of heavy fighting between soldiers and rebels now stands at more than 100.
At least 54 soldiers and 50 guerillas have died in clashes around the northwestern cities of Bagado and Dabeiba.
Nearly all of the buildings, government buildings in those two cities, have been reportedly destroyed.
The clashes began Wednesday, when the rebel revolutionary armed forces of Colombia launched attacks on a number of northwestern towns.
An army helicopter went down close to the border with Panama, killing all 22 soldiers on board.
In South Asia, authorities in Bangladesh's Southwestern port of Mongla have called on the Army to control riots that have left at least four people dead and 58 injured.
Officials say the trouble began when striking dock workers tried to storm the port authority offices and police fired to disperse them.
The demonstrators are demanding that more people be hired to load and unload goods at the port.
Beginning early next year, visitors to Yosemite National Park in California will see some changes.
A new plan is aimed at protecting the giant Sequoia trees, scenic valleys, and waterfalls from the impact of four million tourists a year.
Under the new plan, visitors will have very limited access to the park by car.
The 343 million-dollar plan will create a new shuttle bus system to alleviate traffic congestion.
It will also remove roads from meadows, create more hiking trails, and restore campsites damaged by a 1997 flood.
Yosemite spokesman Scott Gediman says while these measures have been controversial, the preservation effort will not sacrifice visitor enjoyment.
And so we certainly do not want to limit access or will not limit access to the National Park, but we need to design the facilities, design parking areas, design the infrastructure in a way that we can handle these large amounts of people.
Yosemite is not alone in seeking new management strategies to preserve natural areas.
Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona is putting in a light rail system.
And Zion National Park in Utah has just established a new shuttle bus system.
With environment briefs, I'm Roseanne Skirble.
President Clinton has urged Russian President Vladimir Putin to order the release on humanitarian grounds of a US businessman convicted of spying.
A White House spokesman says the two leaders spoke by telephone today, after the Russian government's pardon commission recommended the release of Edmond Pope.
Earlier, a senior Russian official said Edmond Pope could be home by Christmas.
The former US naval intelligence officer was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison Wednesday, on charges he illegally obtained a classified information on a Russian torpedo.
Colombia's second largest Marxist rebel army has released forty-two soldiers and police officers.
Government officials say the National Liberation Army freed the captives today in Northern Colombia.
The forty-two prisoners were captured two years ago during clashes with the guerilla group.
Hardly a day passes without news photos of the police dragging limp protesters from some building or thoroughfare in one of our cities.
Of recent note are the activities of the pro- and anti-abortionists, anti-nuclear activists, animal rights protesters, college students concerned about racism, anti-apartheid groups, various self-styled "environmentalists" and those dissatisfied with the pace of the war against AIDS.
Maybe he didn't start it, but Mohandas Gandhi certainly provided a recognizable beginning to non-violent civil disobedience as we know it today.
The Mahatma, or "great souled one," instigated several campaigns of passive resistance against the British government in India.
Unfortunately, according to Webster's Biographical Dictionary, "His policies went beyond his control and resulted . . . in riots and disturbances" and later a renewed campaign of civil disobedience "resulted in rioting and a second imprisonment."
I am not a proponent of everything Gandhi did, but some of his law breaking was justified because India was then under occupation by a foreign power, and Indians were not able to participate fully in decisions that vitally affected them.
It is difficult, however, to justify civil disobedience, non-violent or not, where citizens have full recourse to the ballot box to effect change.
Where truly representative governments are safeguarded by constitutional protections of human rights and an independent judiciary to construe those rights, there is no excuse for breaking the law because some individual or group disagrees with it.
There may be a few cases where the law breaking is well pinpointed and so completely non-invasive of the rights of others that it is difficult to criticize it.
The case of Rosa Parks, the black woman who refused to sit at the back of the bus, comes to mind as an illustration.
But most cases of non-violent civil disobedience are not nearly so benign.
The public has a tendency to equate lawful demonstrations with non-violent civil disobedience.
It is true that both are non-violent, but there is a fundamental difference between them.
Lawful demonstrations, such as peaceful picketing and other assemblages that do not disturb the peace or cause a public nuisance or interfere with the rights of others, are rights guaranteed by any truly free system of government.
Civil disobedience, violent or non-violent, is intentional law breaking.
The subject of this discussion is non-violent civil disobedience; but, before we get on with that, let me make just a few tangential remarks about lawful demonstrations.
They are useful to call public attention to grievances, but they have little value in educating anyone about the issues in dispute.
The delight of television in dramatic confrontation encourages overuse of slogans chanted through bullhorns, militant gestures, accusatory signs and other emotionally inspired tactics.
Civilized discourse and an environment where compromise can begin are lost in a hostile posture abetted by superficial media interviews.
At best, demonstrations are overused and boringly uninformative; at worst, they can become the stimuli that lead to law breaking.
Demonstrations are particularly apt to degenerate into criminal conduct when they leave the site of the grievance and become mobile.
Petty criminals and street people looking for excitement attach themselves like remora to the fringes of the crowd and use the protest as an excuse for rock throwing, auto trashing, arson, window breaking, looting, pocket picking and general hooliganism.
Soon the whole purpose of the demonstration is lost in mob mania.
There are better ways to promote a cause.
Where non-violent civil disobedience is the centerpiece, rather than a lawful demonstration that may only attract crime, it is difficult to justify.
Some find no harm in the misdemeanors of trespass, minor property destruction, blocking traffic and the like.
They say these are small prices to pay for galvanizing action for the all-important cause.
The crimes may appear small, but the prices can be huge.
Here are two cases to illustrate.
Assume a neighborhood demonstration to protest speeding on a certain road or a careless accident involving a police car.
The protesters lie down in the street, blocking traffic, and will not move until the authorities carry them away.
Assume that someone caught in the jam has a heart attack.
There is no way to get an ambulance in quickly to move him to a hospital.
He dies.
The demonstration was non-violent and involved only a simple misdemeanor, but its impact on that individual was violent and terminal.
Assume that a TV network is airing a celebrity interview program with a live audience.
The politician appearing is highly controversial and has recently generated a good deal of rancor amid certain groups.
In a planned protest against his appearance, several members of the studio audience chain themselves in front of the TV cameras in such a way that the program cannot continue.
The network must refund money to the advertisers and loses considerable revenue and prestige.
The demonstrators have been non-violent, but the result of their trespasses has been to seriously impair the rights of others unconnected with their dispute.
It might be alleged that TV has done more than its share to popularize and promote non-violent civil disobedience, so the second situation hypothesized above would be simply a case of "chickens coming home to roost."
Or maybe the TV network would lose nothing.
Geraldo or Phil would probably pull up another camera and interview the chained protesters.
Let us look for a moment at another type of non-violent civil disobedience that only harms other people indirectly, yet does irreparable damage to the nation as a whole.
I am referring to those young men who chose to disobey their country's call to arms during the Vietnam war and fled to Canada or some other sanctuary to avoid combat.
Their cowardly acts of civil disobedience, which they tried to hide under the cloak of outrage at a war they characterized as "immoral," weakened the national fabric and threw additional burdens on those who served honorably in that conflict.
Even more at fault are those leaders in and out of government who urged and supported their defections, thereby giving great help and comfort to the enemy propagandists.
It is amazing that the ensuing mass executions in Vietnam and Cambodia do not weight more heavily on minds so morally fine-tuned.
Worse, it remained to a well-meaning but naive president of the United States to administer the final infamy upon those who fought and died in Vietnam.
Under the guise of "healing the wounds of the nation," President Carter pardoned thousands of draft evaders, thus giving dignity to their allegations of the war's "immorality."
The precedent having been set, who can complain if future generations called upon to defend the U.S. yield to the temptation to avoid the danger of combat by simply declaring the war immoral and hiding until it is over?
Finally, I think it important to point out the extraordinarily high visibility of non-violent civil disobedience in these days of intensive media coverage.
Give television a chance to cover live any breaking of the law, and no second invitation will be required.
This brings into question the motives of those who lead civil disobedience demonstrations.
Do they want the spotlight for themselves or for their cause?
Here is a good rule of thumb: If the movement produced the leader, the chance that he is sincere is much greater than if the leader produced the movement.
In either case, ask yourself whether you have become better informed on the issues under protest by watching the act of civil disobedience.
If you have not, it is probable that a thorough airing of the dispute by calm and rational debate would have been the better course.
Mr. Agnew was vice president of the U.S. from 1969 until he resigned in 1973.
As the leading candidate for president of his country in next year's election, Mario Vargas Llosa ought to be in an enviable position.
But his country is Peru, where political visibility, especially for a believer in democracy and free enterprise -- a right winger in Latin American eyes -- makes a man a target for assassination.
For almost any Peruvian these days, to show an interest in public office is a heroic gesture; for Mr. Vargas Llosa especially so, since he already has achieved a high position in the world's eyes as a writer.
Published everywhere to universal acclaim, doted on like a movie star in the Hispanic world from Barcelona to Ushuaia, Mr. Vargas Llosa could live comfortably on his royalties and console his political conscience with the thought that Peru is a hopeless mess not of his making and that he already did his best to reform it with his magnificently cinematic novel about the years of military dictatorship of his youth, "Conversation in the Cathedral."
But, after some hesitation, he is back on the stump and also still writing important novels about Peru.
"The Storyteller" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 246 pages, $17.95), splendidly translated by Helen Lane, first appeared in Spanish in 1987 before the Peruvian economy had reached its present state of virtual collapse.
And in any case the story takes place a bit earlier than that, when the guerrilla war in the highlands had not yet made internal travel a gamble with destiny.
Even still, the very first sentence of this fable that weaves together Peru's most advanced and most primitive cultural strands speaks of "my unfortunate country."
The narrator may be talking about the depredations of the Shining Path Maoists among the Indians of the Andes, or he may be referring to the plunging inti, Peru's rubber currency, or the corrupting effect of the cocaine trade.
But he is swiftly drawn into a tangle of memories about a less newsworthy and more exotic part of Peru: its corner of the Amazon jungle.
This narrator is a foil for Mr. Vargas Llosa, a cosmopolitan writer with one well-tailored leg in journalism.
He is in Florence to shake himself free of Peru and get some writing done, just as Mr. Vargas Llosa has gone to Paris and now goes frequently to London for the same purpose.
But this narrator happens upon some photographs in a gallery, pictures taken in Peruvian Amazonia of the untamed and nomadic Machiguenga tribe.
And they remind him of his own experiences with that unhappy scattered culture and of his friend at Lima's University of San Marcos, Saul Zuratas.
Saul was a high-strung student of ethnography, a Jew marked doubly as an outsider because of a huge wine-dark birthmark on his face, for which people called him Mascarita, Mask Face.
Saul knew about the Machiguengas from his studies, and through him the narrator became interested in this most recalcitrant and un-Westernizable of all the indigenous peoples who had come under the Spanish yoke.
Saul, meanwhile, came to believe that anthropology, even at its most benign, was as insidious a form of cultural imperialism as the superficially more blatant activities of Christian missionaries.
Saul mysteriously disappears.
This is what we know at the end of the opening section of "The Storyteller."
The next voice we hear sounds like this: "There was no evil, there was no wind, there was no rain.
The women bore pure children.
If Tasurinchi wanted to eat, he dipped his hand into the river and brought out a shad flicking its tail . . ."
And this: "Moving, walking.
Keeping on, with or without rain, by land or by water, climbing up the mountain slopes or climbing down the ravines."
The speaker is never identified.
He tells his stories in his majestically simple way, in a "language" all his own.
There are creation myths and cosmologies and hunting stories -- a whole culture is contained within these dreamy narratives.
It is as though Mr. Vargas Llosa had recorded a storytelling session at a Machiguenga campfire.
And this is just the effect he hopes to have on the reader, as he alternates chapters in his "own" voice with chapters somehow "borrowed" from the Machiguenga storyteller.
For most of the book, there is no direct connection between its urban and its Amazonian modes.
But the contrast between them becomes a living thing through the brilliant contrast of narrative styles that Mr. Vargas Llosa creates.
He controls this counterpoint like a novelistic Bach, reaching an audacious extreme in a hilarious chapter in which the "Vargas Llosa" voice relates his adventures as an inept television newsman.
But the joke turns serious when a reportage takes him to Amazonia and he encounters the missionaries who know more than anyone else about the Machiguengas.
By this point, the narrator has become obsessed with finding out about the Machiguenga storytellers, who, he had heard years before, functioned like cultural glue for a tribe split into many small bands in constant motion through the jungle.
The storytellers traveled among the bands, reminding them of their identity.
But why would no Machiguenga the narrator meets during his reportage even admit that there were storytellers?
The narrator eventually deduces the extraordinary answer, which is confirmed in a literally Kafkaesque manner by a storyteller in the next chapter.
I am trying to give away as little as possible, but this is not really a mystery or some kind of jungle thriller.
It will be read for the brilliant clash of styles of narration and the even more brilliant way that they have been tied together into a large metaphor for literature and its function in society.
It was a parent's ultimate nightmare.
As the crippled jet prepared for an emergency landing, Sylvia Tsao wrapped her 23-month-old son, Evan, in blankets and, following cabin-crew orders, placed him on the floor.
She held him down tightly, trying to protect him.
"Suddenly, the world seemed to end," she told investigators later.
Crashing into a cornfield, United Airlines' Flight 232 flipped over, and she lost her grip on her son.
"I saw for an instant my son's body floating and flying" toward the back of the plane, Ms. Tsao recalled.
When the plane stopped moving, she frantically tried to find him.
But Evan died of smoke inhalation.
July's Sioux City crash has fueled an emotionally charged debate.
Safety advocates and members of Congress, calling babies "the neglected population," are stepping up a campaign for the mandatory use of infant safety seats on all flights.
But the Federal Aviation Administration is reluctant to require separate seats for babies because of the added cost for traveling parents.
Some FAA officials note that few infants have been killed in plane crashes, raising the question of whether safety seats really are needed.
A 1981 Harvard Medical School study that scrutinized accidents in the late 1970s concluded that perhaps three babies would have been saved in a five-year period if safety-seat use had been required.
The National Transportation Safety Board will take a close look at the issue during four days of hearings that begin today on the broader issue of what caused the crash that killed 112 people.
"Infants', toddlers' and young children's safety should no longer be ignored as if they don't count," Mrs. Tsao wrote to the board in advocating use of the safety seats.
All 50 states require that small children be strapped into safety seats in cars.
On planes, FAA rules dictate that children two years old and over have their own tickets and be strapped into regular seats, just as adults are.
Babies under two may sit on laps and fly for free.
But it is almost impossible to keep hold of a baby during an air crash, or even in severe turbulence.
During the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson of Cincinnati lost her grip on her baby as the plane lurched and tipped over.
Another passenger heard one-year-old Sabrina's cry and pulled her from an overhead luggage compartment.
The FAA encourages the use of safety seats, but in the past many parents have run into problems trying to use them, even when the plane was only half-full or they had bought an extra ticket especially for the baby.
When Vanessa Merton, an associate dean at Pace University School of Law, decided to take her young son to Europe last spring, she called four carriers to ask about their policies on car seats.
"The people acted like I was transporting heroin," she says.
One reservation agent told her -- incorrectly -- that the airline barred the use of the seats on flights.
After the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson bought a car seat for her daughter for the flight home to Cincinnati.
But on one leg of the trip, she was ordered by a flight attendant to take Sabrina out of the seat and hold her during takeoff and landing -- the most dangerous parts of any flight.
Airlines say that such mistakes are decreasing in the aftermath of Sioux City, but proponents of the safety devices say they still get complaints from parents.
"People are told one thing on the phone, another at check in, another at the gate, and another on the plane," says Stephanie Tombrello, executive director of the Los Angeles Area Child Passenger Safety Association, which petitioned the FAA in June for mandatory use of child-safety seats.
The Association of Flight Attendants, the main flight attendants' union, is strongly backing that request.
The FAA argues that requiring safety seats for all babies might actually diminish, not enhance, safety.
As part of such a rule, officials say, parents would probably be required to buy an extra ticket for the baby.
The increased cost of flying would inevitably encourage some families to drive rather than fly, they say.
Commercial airlines have the lowest accident rate of all transportation modes -- much lower than cars, for example.
Anthony Broderick, the FAA's acting Executive Director for Regulatory Standards and Compliance, contends that the current rule is the best approach because it allows parents to make their own decision on whether to use a safety seat.
But he admits that the agency is in "a very uncomfortable position."
He says the agency soon will propose that airlines be prohibited from denying the use of safety seats.
(Most airlines don't prohibit their use.)
He says the agency also will seek public comment on whether the seats should be required.
Walter Coleman, Vice President of Operations for the Air Transport Association, the trade group for the major airlines, describes the call for safety seats as "legitimate" and says the group is studying the issue.
But privately some airline officials fear that if parents must buy extra tickets for babies, whole families will stop flying.
Others worry that the FAA might write a rule forcing airlines to pick up part of the tab for increased infant safety.
Generally, airlines say they welcome the use of a government-approved safety seat and will even allow the restraint to take up a regular seat for free if the flight isn't crowded.
(Most car seats made in recent years are certified for use on aircraft and are so marked.)
But space can only be guaranteed if a ticket is purchased.
What the industry really wants is some kind of device that would protect babies without taking up an extra seat.
But no one has come up with anything that is safer in a crash than the current practice of bundling babies up and trying to pin them to the floor.
Parents are advised against holding the infants, for fear that in an accident the babies could be crushed by the adult's weight.
Proponents of safety seats are turning up the heat on the FAA.
Yesterday, Rep. James Lightfoot, an Iowa Republican, sent FAA Administrator James Busey a letter signed by 56 House members urging the agency to require infant safety seats.
If the FAA refuses, Rep. Lightfoot says, he will push legislation to require the change.
It is a peaceful time in this part of western India.
The summer crop is harvested, winter sowing has yet to begin.
Farmers in loose turbans and fancy earrings spend their afternoons laughing and gossiping at the markets.
One could imagine such a lull in the lives of the Arabs before the quadrupling of oil prices.
For just as the Arabs were in the 1960s, the farmers of Sidhpur are on the brink of global power and fame.
The Arabs had merely oil.
These farmers may have a grip on the world's very heart.
Or, at least, its heart disease.
That is because Sidhpur has a near-monopoly on the world's supply of flea seed, also known as flea wort or, in Western parlance, psyllium: a tiny, tasteless, obscure seed that, according to early research, may reduce cholesterol levels in the blood.
Ever since the link to cholesterol was disclosed, Americans have begun scarfing up psyllium in their breakfast cereals.
If further research proves the seed's benefits, this dusty farm district could become the epicenter of a health-food fad to rival all fads since cod-liver oil.
"This seed's not grown anywhere else in India, or anywhere else in the world," says T.V. Krishnamurthy, a vice president of Procter & Gamble India Ltd., a major psyllium buyer and promoter.
"The proper climatic conditions don't exist in many places in the world."
Arvind Patel, a processor and exporter of the seed, raves: "If psyllium takes the place of oat bran, it will be huge."
Whether psyllium makes Sidhpur's fortune depends on cholesterol-fearing Americans, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and, of course, the outcome of further research.
Only one thing is certain here: Pysllium is likely to remain solely an export item from Sidhpur for a long time.
Local farmers say it is as good a cash crop as mustard or fenugreek, a legume.
But they have no desire to eat a bowl of psyllium each morning, and, perhaps, little need: lean, frugal vegetarians, the farmers are innocents in the clogged, treacherous world of cholesterol.
Psyllium is an annual herb, Plantago ovata, that has been used for centuries by folk doctors here, mainly as a laxative and anti-diarrheal.
As such, the soluble fiber has an almost fanatic following in northern India.
"I can assure you," attests a 25-year-old lawyer in New Delhi, with a meaningfully raised eyebrow, "from personal experience, it works."
A prominent businessman in Bombay gives a similar testimonial: "I have been taking it daily since 1961."
Folk doctors also prescribe it for kidney, bladder and urethra problems, duodenal ulcers and hemorrhoids.
Some apply it to gouty joints.
The plant has a hairy stem that produces flowers and diminutive seeds.
It is the seed's colorlessness and size -- 1,000 of them weigh only 1.5 grams, or about as much as two paper clips -- that explain the historical allusions to fleas.
The translucent husk of the seed is removed, sifted and crushed; the seed itself is fed to animals.
Some 90% of the crop, which was worth $26 million last year, is exported.
For decades, psyllium husk has been the main ingredient in such laxatives as Procter & Gamble Co.'s Metamucil, the top-selling brand in the U.S., and Ciba-Geigy Corp.'s Fiberall.
But some time ago, researchers discovered that soluble fibers also lower cholesterol levels in the blood.
Cincinnati-based P&G took an interest; it ordered two studies on psyllium and cholesterol.
One of the studies, done at the University of Minnesota, tested 75 people with raised cholesterol levels.
After 16 weeks, the group that took three daily teaspoons of Metamucil saw a significant dip in their general cholesterol levels, and an even larger reduction in levels of low-density lipoproteins, the so-called bad cholesterol.
In late 1987, P&G asked the FDA for approval to market Metamucil as the first non-prescription, cholesterol-lowering product in the U.S.
In April, the psyllium bandwagon got more crowded.
General Mills Inc., the food giant, launched a breakfast cereal called Benefit, containing psyllium, oat, wheat and beet bran; the words, "reduce cholesterol" were prominently displayed on its package.
In September, Kellogg Co. launched a competing psyllium-fortified cereal called Heartwise.
Suddenly, on television, in advertisements and on their cereal boxes, Americans were inundated with news about the obscure seed.
The flood of claims and counter-claims worried consumers and actually hurt sales of the new cereals.
This month, the Food and Drug Administration expressed concern that Americans might someday, in various forms, ingest too much psyllium.
Currently, there is a lull in the psyllium war.
The FDA has asked Kellogg and General Mills to show research that their cereals are safe.
It also ordered P&G to produce more studies to buttress its claims that Metamucil can lower cholesterol.
But the agency hasn't yanked psyllium off store shelves.
If the FDA approves the new uses of psyllium, other companies are expected to rush to market with psyllium products.
"It's going to be a sensational thing," says Mr. Krishnamurthy of P&G in Bombay.
Says psyllium exporter Mr. Patel: "I just got back yesterday from the U.S.
In the newspapers, on the radio and TV, psyllium is everywhere."
But the news of the boom has yet to trickle down to the farmers.
They only know of one use for the crop, as a laxative, and with psyllium prices currently languishing in the wake of a bumper crop, they think of the seed as a marginal crop, something to grow between summer wheat crops.
"Psyllium's not a good crop," complains Sooraji Jath, a 26-year-old farmer from the village of Lakshmipura.
"You get a rain at the wrong time and the crop is ruined."
Even at the Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics Export Promotion Council, the government agency that promotes the seed, the psyllium boom is distant thunder.
The staff brags about psyllium's hefty contribution to American regularity, without quite grasping the implications of the research on cholesterol.
The council's annual report has psyllium on its last page, lumped with such unglamorous export items as sarsaparilla and "Nux vomica," a plant that induces vomiting.
In one way, the psyllium middlemen -- the buyers and exporters -- are glad to keep news of the boom to themselves.
They want psyllium prices low for their purchases next year.
But there's a catch.
Sidhpur and adjacent districts are the only places in the world where psyllium is grown in large quantities.
This is partly due to the particular demands of the crop.
Psyllium needs sandy soil, dew during the first few weeks, and then total dryness when its seeds are maturing.
Small crops are grown in Pakistan, France, Spain, Italy, Belgium and Brazil, but their quality can't compare to that of Indian psyllium.
Big buyers like Procter & Gamble say there are other spots on the globe, and in India, where the seed could be grown.
"It's not a crop that can't be doubled or tripled," says Mr. Krishnamurthy.
But no one has made a serious effort to transplant the crop.
In Sidhpur, it is almost time to sow this year's crop.
Many farmers, too removed to glean psyllium's new sparkle in the West, have decided to plant mustard, fennel, cumin, fenugreek or castor-oil seeds.
Mr. Jath is thinking of passing up psyllium altogether this year in favor of a crop with a future such as cumin or fennel.
"Maybe I'll plant castor-oil seeds."
His brother, Parkhaji, whose head is swathed in a gorgeous crimson turban, nods vigorous assent.
So when next year's psyllium crop is harvested in March, it may be smaller than the 16,000 metric tons of the past few years -- right at the crest of the psyllium boom.
And the world could experience its first psyllium shortage.
Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega may have accomplished over the weekend what his U.S. antagonists have failed to do: revive a constituency for the Contra rebels.
Lawmakers haven't publicly raised the possibility of renewing military aid to the Contras, and President Bush parried the question at a news conference here Saturday, saying only that "if there's an all-out military offensive, that's going to change the equation 180 degrees."
But Mr. Ortega's threat over the weekend to end a 19-month cease-fire with the rebels seeking to topple him, effectively elevated the Contras as a policy priority just as they were slipping from the agendas of their most ardent supporters.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) said yesterday on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" that Mr. Ortega's threat was "a very unwise move, particularly the timing of it."
The threat came during a two-day celebration in Costa Rica to highlight Central America's progress toward democracy in the region, attended by President Bush, Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and 14 other Western Hemisphere leaders.
Mr. Bush returned to Washington Saturday night.
Mr. Ortega announced on Friday that he would end the cease-fire this week in response to the periodic Contra assaults against his army.
Saturday, he amended his remarks to say that he would continue to abide by the cease-fire if the U.S. ends its financial support for the Contras.
He asked that the remaining U.S. humanitarian aid be diverted to disarming and demobilizing the rebels.
Not only did Mr. Ortega's comments come in the midst of what was intended as a showcase for the region, it came as Nicaragua is under special international scrutiny in anticipation of its planned February elections.
Outside observers are gathering in Nicaragua to monitor the registration and treatment of opposition candidates.
And important U.S. lawmakers must decide at the end of November if the Contras are to receive the rest of the $49 million in so-called humanitarian assistance under a bipartisan agreement reached with the Bush administration in March.
The humanitarian assistance, which pays for supplies such as food and clothing for the rebels amassed along the Nicaraguan border with Honduras, replaced the military aid cut off by Congress in February 1988.
While few lawmakers anticipated that the humanitarian aid would be cut off next month, Mr. Ortega's threat practically guarantees that the humanitarian aid will be continued.
Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) said yesterday on "Meet the Press": "I would hope after his {Mr. Ortega's} act yesterday or the day before, we'd have unanimous support for quick action on remaining humanitarian aid."
Sen. Dole also said he hoped for unanimous support for a resolution he plans to offer tomorrow denouncing the Nicaraguan leader.
While renewing military aid had been considered out of the question, rejected by Congress and de-emphasized by the Bush administration, Mr. Ortega's statement provides Contra supporters with the opportunity to press the administration on the issue.
"The administration should now state that if the February election is voided by the Sandinistas . . . they should call for military aid," said former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.
"In these circumstances, I think they'd win."
Sen. Mitchell said that congressional Democrats intend to honor the March agreement to give non-lethal support to the Contras through the February elections, although he added that the agreement requires that the Contras not initiate any military action.
Mr. Ortega's threat to breach the cease-fire comes as U.S. officials were acknowledging that the Contras have at times violated it themselves.
Secretary of State James Baker, who accompanied President Bush to Costa Rica, told reporters Friday: "I have no reason to deny reports that some Contras ambushed some Sandinista soldiers."
Mr. Baker's assistant for inter-American affairs, Bernard Aronson, while maintaining that the Sandinistas had also broken the cease-fire, acknowledged: "It's never very clear who starts what."
He added that the U.S. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire.
In addition to undermining arguments in favor of ending Contra aid, Mr. Ortega's remarks also played to the suspicions of some U.S. officials and conservatives outside the government that he is searching for ways to manipulate or void the February elections.
Administration officials traveling with President Bush in Costa Rica interpreted Mr. Ortega's wavering as a sign that he isn't responding to the military attacks so much as he is searching for ways to strengthen his hand prior to the elections.
Mr. Abrams said that Mr. Ortega is seeking to demobilize the Contras prior to the elections to remove any pressure to hold fair elections.
"My sense is what they have in mind is an excuse for clamping down on campaigning" by creating an atmosphere of a military emergency, he said.
A frozen mountaintop in Tibet may offer an important clue about whether the Earth is warming perilously.
Researchers at Ohio State University and Lanzhou Institute of Glaciology and Geocryology in China have analyzed samples of glacial ice in Tibet and say temperatures there have been significantly higher on average over the past half-century than in any similar period in the past 10,000 years.
The ice samples are an important piece of evidence supporting theories that the Earth has warmed considerably in recent times, largely because of pollutants in the air, and will warm far more in the century ahead.
A substantial warming would melt some of the Earth's polar ice caps, raising the level of the oceans and causing widespread flooding of heavily populated coastal areas.
"If you can use data to reconstruct what happened in the past, you have much more confidence in predictions for the future," said Lonnie Thompson, a research scientist at Ohio State who dug for and analyzed the ice samples.
To compare temperatures over the past 10,000 years, researchers analyzed the changes in concentrations of two forms of oxygen.
These measurements can indicate temperature changes, researchers said, because the rates of evaporation of these oxygen atoms differ as temperatures change.
Analysis of ice from the Dunde ice cap, a glacial plateau in Tibet 17,000 feet above sea level, show that average temperatures were higher in 1937-87 than in any other 50-year period since before the last Ice Age, Mr. Thompson said.
Some climate models project that interior regions of Asia would be among the first to heat up in a global warming because they are far from oceans, which moderate temperature changes.
But the ice-core samples aren't definitive proof that the so-called greenhouse effect will lead to further substantial global heating, Mr. Thompson acknowledged.
According to greenhouse theories, increased carbon dioxide emissions, largely caused by burning of fossil fuels, will cause the Earth to warm up because carbon dioxide prevents heat from escaping into space.
Skeptics say that if that's the case, temperatures should have risen fairly uniformly over the past century, reflecting the increase in carbon dioxide.
Instead, the Dunde ice-core record shows increasing temperatures from 1900 through the early 1950s, decreasing temperatures from the late 1950s through the mid-1970s, then higher temperatures again through last year.
Other temperature data show similar unexplained swings.
"Climate varies drastically due to natural causes," said Mr. Thompson.
But he said ice samples from Peru, Greenland and Antarctica all show substantial signs of warming.
An enormous turtle has succeeded where the government has failed: He has made speaking Filipino respectable.
The 6 1/2-foot-tall turtle, Pong Pagong, is a character who stars in the children's television show "Batibot."
He speaks only in Filipino.
"Batibot," which started in 1983 as a hybrid of the U.S. program "Sesame Street," has developed into a distinctly Philippine effort.
Radio programs and books have followed the daily television show.
In the process, "Batibot," an archaic Filipino word meaning "strong" or "enduring," has become a powerful advocate of the use of the Filipino language.
"It impresses on ordinary, young Filipinos that there's nothing to feel inferior about in using their own language," says Randy David, a sociologist and host of a popular television talk show.
"When we started the program six years ago, the use of Filipino was deemed unwise by the predominantly middle class," says Lydia Brown, the program's creator.
Now, she says, "it's no longer an issue."
The success of "Batibot" stands in marked contrast to many academic and government attempts to promote Filipino as a national language.
Filipino -- once known as Pilipino -- is predominantly Tagalog, the Malay-based language spoken in a part of the country's principal island of Luzon.
Resistance to a national language comes primarily from members of the country's elite, who generally prefer English.
But while better-off Filipinos are quick to cite the logic in using a language as widespread as English, they are often slow to reveal that they are prejudiced against Filipino, say advocates of the native language.
"For the middle and upper-middle class {Filipino} is declasse," says Bien Lumbera, a Philippine-studies professor at Quezon City's University of the Philippines.
There's also resentment.
Other opponents of Filipino come from non-Tagalog regions.
They argue that their own languages should have equal weight, although recent surveys indicate that the majority of the country's population understands Filipino more than any other language.
(There are seven major languages and more than 70 dialects in the country.)
What tongue to speak is an emotional mine field in the Philippines.
It is entrenched in the country's colonial bonds to the U.S., in Philippine class structure, in the regional loyalties of its people and in its island geography.
As they did when the Philippines was a colony of the U.S., teachers for the most part teach in English, even though it is a foreign language for most Philippine children.
As a result, they often speak one language at home, another at school.
Mrs. Brown calls the modern-day cultural ambivalence to Filipino a "language schizophrenia."
The issue has been simmering for years.
It doesn't take much to provoke an intense debate.
When President Corazon Aquino, whose command of Filipino is spotty, announced last year that the language would be used in official communications, there was an uproar from many legislators, who continue to conduct debates mostly in English.
But many proponents of Filipino see resistance to the language finally crumbling.
They believe the media, including "Batibot," have played a crucial role.
According to chief scriptwriter Rene Villanueva, "Batibot" doesn't set out to advance the cause of Filipino.
"It's not as if we're teaching language per se," he says, "We're just using it."
These days, "Batibot" is produced in a converted lumberyard on a shoestring budget of $3,000 a one-hour segment.
It is shown weekdays on two of the country's five networks.
With an audience totaling more than 400,000, "Batibot" consistently ranks in the country's top-four most-watched daytime programs.
But advertising revenue is inadequate.
Periodically, there are threats that the program will fold.
"Batibot" lacks the polish of "Sesame Street."
Sound stages echo.
Acting sometimes falls flat.
There are only two large puppets in the program: Pong Pagong and a monkey named Kiko Matsing.
But the production is the equal of any local program.
And the show's creativity makes up for any technological deficiencies.
The program isn't afraid to tackle controversial topics such as nuclear weapons and the environment.
Not that the language war is won, even on "Batibot."
During one recent episode, all the advertisements were in English.
The Canadian government, with a view to becoming more politically active in Latin America, is expected to announce tomorrow its application to join the Organization of American States, a Washington-based regional agency.
The expected Canadian move has been welcomed by the Bush administration even though Canada has opposed such U.S. actions as the trade embargo against Cuba, the invasion of Grenada and the military support for Nicaragua's Contra guerrillas.
Latin American countries have long urged Canada to join the OAS in the hopes that it would be a counterweight to the U.S., which for many years tended to dominate the 32-nation organization.
Even though the U.S. also has supported Canadian membership, it hasn't been a Washington priority.
"The fact that we might not side with the Americans may be a reason why Canada's membership in the OAS hasn't been, over the years, an item high on the U.S. agenda," said Allan Gotlieb, former Canadian ambassador to the U.S.
The Canadian application is expected to be announced in San Jose, Costa Rica, by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who is attending a centenary celebration of Costa Rican democracy.
"Canada has a larger and more beneficial role to play in the hemisphere," Mr. Mulroney said recently.
Some Canadian political commentators have opposed Canada's joining what they see as a U.S.-dominated organization.
"Canada could do plenty of things to get serious about Latin America without running the risk of getting caught in the cross fire" between the U.S. and Latin American members of the OAS, said Jeffrey Simpson, a columnist in Toronto's Globe & Mail newspaper.
Canada, at times, could be an awkward OAS partner for the U.S. if its United Nations voting record is an indication.
In U.N. General Assembly votes last year, Canada voted the same as the U.S. only 63% of the time.
France voted the same as the U.S. 76% of the time, West Germany 79% and Britain 83%.
Larry Birns, director of the Washington-based Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberal research group, said that Latin American countries would be "profoundly disappointed" if Canada were to follow the U.S. lead in the OAS.
"Latin Americans see Canada as a non-interventionist power that respects their sovereignty," he said.
The OAS, which tries to promote peace and economic development within the Americas, is attempting to find a settlement of the current Panama political crisis.
Cuba has been suspended from OAS membership, but the organization's members are discussing Cuba's reinstatement.
Early this century, diamond mining in the magnificent dunes where the Namib Desert meets the Atlantic Ocean was a day at the beach.
Men would crawl in the sand looking for shiny stones.
It was as easy as collecting sea shells at Malibu.
Men are still combing the beach with shovels and hand brushes, searching for that unusual glint.
But only after a fleet of 336 gargantuan earthmoving vehicles belonging to De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the world's diamond kingpins, do their work.
Last year, 43 million tons of desert were moved from one dune to another to recover 934,242 carats, which comes to 46 tons of sand per carat, or one-fifth gram.
Oh yes, the Atlantic was also pushed back 300 yards.
"If there's diamonds out there, we'll get to them," says Les Johns, De Beers's engineering manager.
Here, wedged between shifting dunes and pounding waves at the world's most inhospitable diamond dig, lies the earth's most precious jewel box.
Thanks to centuries of polishing by Mother Nature -- first in the gentle current of the Orange River that carried the stones from South Africa's interior, then in the cold surf of the ocean, and finally in the coarse sands of the desert -- 98% of the diamonds uncovered are of gem quality.
While other mines might yield more carats, a higher percentage of them go to industrial use.
Since this treasure chest is too big to fit in a bank vault, it has been turned into one.
Months after railway worker Zacharias Lewala first picked up a diamond from the sand in 1908, the German colonialists who controlled Namibia proclaimed a wide swath of the desert -- about 200 miles north from the Orange River and 60 miles inland from the Atlantic -- a restricted area, a designation normally reserved for military operations.
When the Germans lost World War I, they lost Namibia to South Africa and the diamonds to Ernest Oppenheimer, patriarch of Anglo American Corp. and De Beers.
Today, no one gets in or out of the restricted area without De Beers's stingy approval.
The mining zone has thus remained one of the most desolate places in Africa.
Ghost towns dot the Namib dunes, proving diamonds aren't forever.
Oranjemund, the mine headquarters, is a lonely corporate oasis of 9,000 residents.
Jackals roam the streets at night, and gemsbok, hardy antelope with long straight horns, wander in from the desert to drink from water sprinklers.
On most days, the desert's heat and the cool of the ocean combine to create a mist like a damp rag.
The wind, stinging with sand, never seems to stop.
Still, miners from all parts of Namibia as well as professional staff from De Beers's head offices in South Africa and London keep coming.
And Oranjemund boasts attractions besides diamonds.
There are six video rental shops, three restaurants, one cinema and 34 sports and recreation clubs for everything from cricket to lawn bowling.
The pride of Oranjemund is the 18-hole golf course -- with the largest sand trap in the world.
Last year, when the rising Orange River threatened to swamp the course, the same engineers who are pushing back the Atlantic rushed to build a wall to hold back the flood.
"Nothing is too good for our golf course," says Tony George, a mining engineer.
Despite fears the mine may be partially nationalized by the new Namibian government following next month's elections freeing the country from South African control, De Beers engineers are working to extend the mine's productive life for another 25 years, from the current estimate of 10.
Huge machines that look as though they came from the Star Wars desert-battle scene lumber among the dunes.
Mechanized vacuum cleaners probe the sand like giant anteaters; a whirring ferris wheel-like excavator, with buckets instead of seats, chews through layers of compacted sand; tracks and conveyor belts, shuttling sand to the screening plants, criss-cross the beach.
Then there is the artificial sea wall, 600 yards long and 60 yards thick, jutting into the ocean.
Made of sand, it receives around-the-clock maintenance against the battering waves.
When the mining in front of the wall is complete, it is moved northward.
A companion jetty that helps hold back the sea looks like a rusting junkyard.
Engineers first used concrete blocks to bolster the barrier, but the ocean tossed them aside like driftwood.
Then someone decided to try broken-down earthmoving equipment that, inexplicably, held against the waves.
"The Caterpillar people aren't too happy when they see their equipment used like that," shrugs Mr. George.
"They figure it's not a very good advert."
Despite all these innovations, most of the diamonds are still found in the sand swept away by the men wielding shovels and brushes -- the ignominiously named "bedrock sweepers" who toil in the wake of the excavators.
Laboring in blue and gray overalls, they are supposed to concentrate on cleaning out crevices, and not strain their eyes looking for diamonds.
But should they spy one, the company will pay a bonus equal to one-third its value.
For these workers at the bottom of the mine's pay scale, this is usually enough to overcome the temptation to steal -- a crime that could earn them up to 15 years in jail.
Still, employees do occasionally try to smuggle out a gem or two.
One man wrapped several diamonds in the knot of his tie.
Another poked a hole in the heel of his shoe.
A food caterer stashed stones in the false bottom of a milk pail.
None made it past the body searches and X-rays of mine security.
The Food and Drug Administration banned all imports of mushrooms from China in response to a rash of food-poisoning outbreaks linked to canned Chinese mushrooms.
"The agency has concluded that contamination may be widespread throughout the mushroom-processing industry in China," an FDA spokesman said yesterday.
The agency won't allow mushrooms that were canned or packed in brine at any Chinese plant to enter the U.S. until "satisfactory sanitation-control measures are implemented in China to prevent" bacterial contamination.
On May 19, the FDA began detaining Chinese mushrooms in 68-ounce cans after more than 100 people in Mississippi, New York and Pennsylvania became ill from eating tainted mushrooms.
In subsequent tests, the agency found smaller-size cans from several Chinese plants to be similarly contaminated.
The outbreaks were traced to Staphylococcus aureus, a type of bacteria that produces a toxin capable of surviving the high temperatures used in canning vegetables.
A recall of the mushrooms blamed for the food poisoning began in early March.
In 1987, China exported 65 million pounds of mushrooms, valued at $47 million, to the U.S.
The shipments went mostly to food-service distributors that supply pizzerias and restaurants.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here said that the Beijing government has taken "many effective measures" to stop the mushroom contamination and is further investigating the underlying causes.
He predicted the problem will be solved "very soon."
Outside the white-walled headquarters of the so-called Society of Orange Workers, all seems normal in South Africa's abnormal society.
A pickup truck driven by a white farmer rumbles past with a load of black workers bouncing in the back.
Over at Conradies, the general store, a black stock boy scurries to help an elderly white woman with her packages.
Down the street, a car pulls into the Shell station and is surrounded by black attendants.
But inside the white walls of the Orange Workers' office -- just about the largest building in town, save for the Dutch Reformed Church and the school -- South Africa's neat racial order is awry.
A dozen white office workers fold newsletters and stuff them into envelopes.
White women serve tea and coffee, and then wash the cups and saucers afterwards.
White children empty the wastepaper baskets and squeegee the windows.
There isn't a black worker in sight.
Not in the kitchen, or the storeroom or the book shop.
"If we want to have our own nation, then we must be willing to do all the work ourselves," says Hendrik Verwoerd Jr., son of the former prime minister and the leader of the Orange Workers, founded in 1980.
They do indeed want their own nation.
The pillars of apartheid may be trembling in the rest of South Africa, with Johannesburg opening its public facilities to all races, blacks storming the all-white beaches of the Cape and the government releasing seven leaders of the banned African National Congress.
But here in Morgenzon, a sleepy town amid the corn fields of the eastern Transvaal, the Orange Workers are holding the pillars steady.
The Orange Workers -- who take their name from William of Orange of the Netherlands, a hero of the Dutch-descended Afrikaners -- believe that the solution to South Africa's racial problems isn't the abolition of apartheid, it's the perfection of apartheid -- complete and total separation of the races.
Here, then, is where the Orange Workers have come to make apartheid's last stand.
Their idea is to create a city, first, and then an entire nation -- without blacks.
This may seem to be a preposterous and utterly futile effort in Africa.
And the fact that there are only 3,000 card-carrying Orange Workers may put them on the loony fringe.
But their ideal of an Afrikaner homeland, an all-white reserve to be carved out of present-day South Africa, is a mainstream desire of the right-wing, which embraces about one-third of the country's five million whites.
Afrikaner philosophers and theologians have long ruminated on the need for a white homeland.
The Orange Workers are just putting this preaching into practice.
Thus, farmer Johan Fischer, his T-shirt and jeans covered in grease, crawls around under his planter, tightening bolts and fixing dents.
On almost every other farm in South Africa, black workers do the repairs.
But not here.
Mr. Fischer plows his own fields, sows his own corn and sunflowers, and feeds his own sheep.
Over at the fiberglass factory, four white workers assemble water tanks on their own, and in their spare time they build townhouses across the road.
On Main Street, Alida Verwoerd and her daughters look after the clothes and fabric shop, then hurry home to fix lunch for the rest of the family.
Down by the stream, a group of Orange Workers puts the finishing touches on a golf course.
If whites want to play there by themselves, says consulting engineer Willem van Heerden, whites should also build it by themselves.
"If we want to survive as a people," he says, "we have to change our way of life.
The Afrikaner must end his reliance on others."
In their quest to perfect apartheid, the Orange Workers have discovered a truth that most of privileged white South Africa tries mightily to deny: The master can't become dependent on the slave and expect to remain master forever.
"If apartheid means you want cheap black labor and all the comforts that go with it, but you also want to exclude the blacks from social and political integration, then these are two contradictions that can't go on forever," says Mr. Verwoerd.
He is sitting in his living room, beneath a huge portrait of his late father, Hendrik F. Verwoerd, apartheid's architect and South African prime minister from 1958 to 1966.
Somewhere, the son sighs, things went terribly wrong with apartheid; today, whites even rely on blacks to police their separation.
"People took separate development as an opportunity to use black labor without ever getting rid of it.
But my father meant it to mean real separation," says the son.
The Orange Workers speak sincerely.
"We agree with world opinion that the status quo in South Africa is morally wrong," says Pieter Bruwer, the Orange Workers' chief scribe and pamphleteer.
"We must either integrate honestly or segregate honestly."
Morgenzon has long been a special domain of Afrikanerdom.
According to Mr. Verwoerd, the early Afrikaner pioneers were the first people to settle in the eastern Transvaal, even before the blacks.
Then, when Morgenzon was incorporated in 1908, the farmer who owned the land stipulated that only whites could reside in town; blacks could work there, but they had to leave at night.
Today, Morgenzon is a town of 800 whites and two paved roads.
Weeds push up through the cracks in the sidewalks, and many houses and storefronts are empty.
There are few factories and no mines.
It was an ideal place for the Orange Workers to start their new nation, unencumbered by the demographics that have undermined apartheid elsewhere in South Africa.
So far, about 150 Orange Workers have moved here, spending nearly $1 million buying up property over the past three years.
Still, complete and total segregation remains elusive.
Just beyond the city limits is a shantytown of 2,000 blacks who are employed throughout the area.
Despite the Orange Workers' intention to put them all out of work, they are in no hurry to leave.
A young man called July (that's when he was born), who works at the railroad station just up the street from the Orange Workers office, points at the white walled building and says matter-of-factly, "We're not allowed in there, that's all I know."
The 650-or-so local whites who aren't Orange Workers are more troubled.
Try as they might, they just can't conceive of life without black workers.
"Impossible, impossible," say the Conradies, an elderly couple who have run the general store for decades.
"We can't do without their help," says Mrs. Conradie.
"Oh no.
We need them and I thank God for them."
Over at the Shell station, owner Rudi van Dyk, who doubles as Morgenzon's mayor, worries that the Orange Workers have made his town the laughingstock of the nation.
"What they want us to do just isn't practical," he says, noting that he employs 16 blacks.
"I couldn't afford to hire 16 whites.
The only Afrikaners who would be willing to work for this salary wouldn't know how to handle money."
Back at the Verwoerd house, Hendrik Sr. peers down over the shoulder of Hendrik Jr.
The son believes that when the Afrikaners finally realize there is no turning back the integration of South African society and politics, Morgenzon will boom.
"We urge our people not to wait until they have to fight for their own nation," says Mr. Verwoerd.
"By populating a place now, we make ourselves a power any new government will have to take into account."
Curiously, he compares the Orange Workers to the ANC, which his father outlawed in 1960.
"The ANC won't be stopped until there is a provision for black aspirations," says Mr. Verwoerd.
"Likewise, no government will stop this idea of the Afrikaners."
He apologizes for sounding pushy.
"Look," he says, "If the rest of South Africa wants to have an integrated melting pot, that's their choice.
We'll leave them alone.
We just want to have our own cup of tea."
And they will even serve it themselves.
When Maj. Moises Giroldi, the leader of the abortive coup in Panama, was buried, his body bore several gunshot wounds, a cracked skull and broken legs and ribs.
They were the signature of his adversary, Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The rebel officer's slow and painful death, at the headquarters of Panama's Battalion-2000 squad, was personally supervised by Gen. Noriega, says a U.S. official with access to intelligence reports.
Leaping into rages, sinking into bouts of drunkenness and mistrust, Mr. Noriega has put to death some 70 of his troops involved in the coup, according to U.S. officials monitoring crematoriums and funeral parlors in Panama City.
He is now changing the place he sleeps every night, sometimes more than once a night.
His meals are most often prepared by women he trusts -- his full-time mistress, Vicky Amado, and her mother, Norma.
And he is collecting the names of those who telephoned the coup-makers to congratulate them during their brief time in control of his headquarters.
More enemies to be dealt with.
In the two weeks since the rebellion, which the U.S. hesitantly backed, Mr. Noriega has been at his most brutal-and efficient-in maintaining power.
Yet, while the failed coup is a major U.S. foreign policy embarrassment, it is merely the latest chapter in a byzantine relationship between Mr. Noriega and Washington that stretches back three decades.
America's war on the dictator over the past two years, following his indictment on drug charges in February 1988, is the legacy of that relationship.
Before American foreign policy set out to destroy Noriega, it helped create him out of the crucible of Panama's long history of conspirators and pirates.
For most of the past 30 years, the marriage was one of convenience.
In 1960, for example, when Mr. Noriega was both a cadet at an elite military academy in Peru and a spy-in-training for the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, he was detained by Lima authorities for allegedly raping and savagely beating a prostitute, according to a U.S. Embassy cable from that period.
The woman had nearly died.
But U.S. intelligence, rather than rein in or cut loose its new spy, merely filed the report away.
Mr. Noriega's tips on emerging leftists at his school were deemed more important to U.S. interests.
From that point on, the U.S. would make a practice of overlooking the Panamanian's misadventures.
The U.S. has befriended and later turned against many dictators, but none quite so resourceful.
The 55-year-old Mr. Noriega isn't as smooth as the shah of Iran, as well-born as Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza, as imperial as Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines or as bloody as Haiti's Baby Doc Duvalier.
Yet he has proved more resilient than any of them.
And out of necessity: the U.S. can make mistakes and still hope to remove him from power, but a single error on his part could cost him his life.
"The U.S. underestimated Noriega all along," says Ambler Moss, a former Ambassador to Panama.
"He has mastered the art of survival."
In keeping with America's long history of propping up Mr. Noriega, recent U.S. actions have extended rather than shortened his survival.
Mr. Noriega might have fallen of his own weight in 1988 because of Panama's dire economic situation, says Mr. Moss, but increasing external pressure has only given him additional excuses for repression, and a scapegoat for his own mismanagement.
"If the U.S. had sat back and done nothing, he might not have made it through 1988," Mr. Moss contends.
Perhaps most important, Mr. Noriega's allies have intervened to encourage -- in some cases, to demand -- that the dictator maintain his grip of the throne.
One Colombian drug boss, upon hearing in 1987 that Gen. Noriega was negotiating with the U.S. to abandon his command for a comfortable exile, sent him a hand-sized mahogany coffin engraved with his name.
"He is cornered," says the Rev. Fernando Guardia, who has led Catholic Church opposition against Noriega.
"The Americans have left him without a way out.
It is easy to fight when you don't have any other option."
His chief advantage in the fight: his intimate knowledge of American ways and weaknesses.
Mr. Noriega often tells friends that patience is the best weapon against the gringos, who have a short attention span and little stomach for lasting confrontation.
The U.S. discovered the young Tony Noriega in late 1959, when he was in his second year at the Chorrillos Military Academy in Lima, according to former U.S. intelligence officials.
The contact occurred through Mr. Noriega's half-brother, a Panamanian diplomat based in Peru named Luis Carlos Noriega Hurtado.
Luis Carlos, knowing that helping the Americans could advance the career of any Panamanian officer, relayed Tony's reports on the leftist tendencies he observed among his fellow students and, more important, among his officers and instructors.
A spy was born.
It was a heady experience for the pockmarked and slightly built Mr. Noriega, who was known to his friends as Cara la Pina -- pineapple face.
Born the illegitimate son of his father's maid, he was raised on the mean streets of the central market district of Panama City.
Tony was four years older than most of his fellow cadets, and gained admission to the academy because his brother had falsified his birth certificate.
He considered himself intellectually superior to his Peruvian peers, many of whom were wayward sons sent by their well-off families to the highly disciplined, French-modeled academy as a sort of reform school.
In his peaked military cap and neatly pressed, French-made uniform, Noriega felt more respected and powerful than ever in his underprivileged life, friends from the period say.
"He had an elegant uniform with gold buttons in a country where there was a cult of militarism, where officers were the elite with special privileges," recalls Darien Ayala, a fellow student in Peru and a lifelong friend.
Mr. Noriega's relationship to American intelligence agencies became contractual in either 1966 or 1967, intelligence officials say.
His commanding officer at the Chiriqui Province garrison, Major Omar Torrijos, gave him an intriguing assignment: Mr. Noriega would organize the province's first intelligence service.
The spy network would serve two clients: the Panamanian government, by monitoring political opponents in the region, and the U.S., by tracking the growing Communist influence in the unions organized at United Fruit Co.'s banana plantations in Bocas del Toros and Puerto Armuelles.
United Fruit was one of the two largest contributors to Panama's national income.
Satisfying its interests was a priority for any Panamanian leader.
Mr. Noriega's initial retainer was only $50 to $100 a month, plus occasional gifts of liquor or groceries from the American PX, a former intelligence official says.
It was modest pay by American standards, but a healthy boost to his small military salary, which fellow officers remember as having been $300 to $400 monthly.
"He did it very well," recalls Boris Martinez, a former Panamanian colonel who managed Mr. Noriega and his operation.
"He started building the files that helped him gain power."
A National Guard job assumed by Capt. Noriega in 1964 -- as chief of the transit police in David City, capital of the Chiriqui Province -- was tailor-made for an aspiring super-spy.
By pressuring taxi and bus drivers who needed licenses, he gained a ready cache of information.
He knew which local luminaries had been caught driving drunk, which had been found with their mistresses.
This proved particularly valuable to the Panamanian government in 1967, when union leaders were planning a May Day march that the government feared could turn violent.
Mr. Noriega had learned that a local union leader was sleeping with the wife of his deputy.
So he splashed the information on handbills that he distributed throughout the banana-exporting city of Puerto Armuelles, which was ruled by United Fruit Co.
The campaign so divided union leaders that the government found them far easier to control.
"It was like a play on Broadway," recalls Mr. Martinez.
"Noriega managed the whole thing.
He was superb.
Noriega was an expert at bribing and blackmailing people."
During his years in Chiriqui, however, Mr. Noriega also revealed himself as an officer as perverse as he was ingenious.
Rodrigo Miranda, a local lawyer and human-rights monitor, recalls an intoxicated Noriega visiting prisoners in their cells at the 5th Zone Garrison headquarters in David, where he had his offices.
Mr. Noriega would order them all to take off their clothes and run around the courtyard naked, laughing at them and then retreating to his office.
"People started wondering if something was wrong with him," Mr. Miranda recalls.
But through this period, so far as the U.S. military was concerned, Mr. Noriega was a model recruit.
He signed up for intelligence and counter-intelligence training under American officers at Fort Gulick in Panama in July 1967, according to a copy of a 1983 resume with details Mr. Noriega has since classified as secret.
He flew to Fort Bragg, N.C., in September of that year for a course in psychological operations, returning to the School of the Americas in Panama for a two-month course called "military intelligence for officers."
Some American officers interpreted his eagerness and studiousness as a sign of loyalty, but they did so falsely.
He rose to chief of intelligence in Panama's so-called G-2 in 1970 after providing populist dictator Torrijos the critical support to defeat a coup attempt against him a year earlier.
He became Gen. Torrijos's inseparable shadow, and the holder of all Panama's secrets.
Mr. Noriega, by now a lieutenant colonel, expanded his contacts to include the Cubans -- not to mention the Israelis, the Taiwanese and any other intelligence service that came knocking.
When U.S. diplomats complained to the CIA of Col. Noriega's moonlighting, intelligence experts always insisted that his allegiance was first to the Americans.
"Early on in the State Department, we took to calling him the rent-a-colonel, in tribute to his ability to simultaneously milk the antagonistic intelligence services of Cuba and the United States," recalls Francis J. McNeil, who, as deputy assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, first ran across reports about Mr. Noriega in 1977.
"Some of us wondered how our intelligence people could put so much stock in his information when he was just as close to the Cubans."
Even at this early stage, drugs caused additional concerns.
During the Nixon administration, the Drug Enforcement Administration became dismayed at the extent of the G-2's connections to arrested drug traffickers.
One DEA agent drew up a list of five options for dealing with Col. Noriega, one of which was assassination.
The head of the DEA at the time, John Ingersoll, scotched the assassination plan.
But he did fly to Panama to scold dictator Torrijos on the drug ties of Panamanian officials, including Mr. Noriega.
Mr. Ingersoll later recalled that Gen. Torrijos seemed afraid to act on the concerns of the U.S.
"Everybody was afraid of him," Mr. Ingersoll says.
Mr. Noriega became an even greater threat in 1976, when U.S. intelligence services discovered that he had been buying recordings of electronically monitored conversations from three sergeants working for the U.S. Army's 470th Military Intelligence Group.
The tapes included wiretaps of Gen. Torrijos's own phone, according to American intelligence officials.
"We caught him with his hands on our cookie jar," says former CIA Director Stansfield Turner.
For the first time, the U.S. considered cutting Mr. Noriega from its intelligence payroll -- and the deliberations were intense, Mr. Turner says.
"In the world of intelligence, if you want to get information, you get it from seedy characters.
The question is how much you get tied in with seedy characters so they can extort you."
Intelligence officials to this day worry whether Mr. Noriega sold sensitive information on the recordings to the Cubans or others.
Mr. Turner was troubled enough to cancel the U.S. contract with the rent-a-colonel at the beginning of the Carter administration.
The U.S. soon found new cause for concern: gun-running.
Prosecutors in Southern Florida indicted five Panamanians on charges of illegally running arms to Sandinista rebels trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan government of Mr. Somoza.
They included one of Mr. Noriega's closest friends and business partners, Carlos Wittgreen.
And the investigators were quickly closing in on Mr. Noriega himself.
At the time, though, in 1979, the U.S. was once again flirting with its longtime Latin American spy.
Mr. Noriega made plans to fly to Washington for a meeting with his counterpart at the Pentagon.
Dade County and federal authorities, learning that he intended to fly through Miami, made plans to arrest him on the gun-running charges as soon as he hit U.S. soil.
It was a Friday in June.
The Pentagon foiled the plan.
According to military officers at the time, word was passed to Mr. Noriega by his American hosts that the police would be waiting.
On Monday, U.S. officials received a routine, unclassified message from the military group commander in Panama.
"Due to health reasons, Lt. Col. Noriega has elected to postpone his visit to Washington," it read.
Prosecutors in Miami received yet another setback.
Their original indictment against Mr. Wittgreen, the friend of Mr. Noriega, and the other four was dismissed on a technicality.
But now, along with re-indicting Mr. Noriega's pal, they intended to charge Mr. Noriega himself, on allegations that he was involved in the illegal trading of some $2 million in arms.
In January 1980, Jerome Sanford, as assistant U.S. attorney, was summoned to a meeting with a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent assigned to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Miami.
Panamanian dictator Torrijos, he was told, had granted the shah of Iran asylum in Panama as a favor to Washington.
Mr. Sanford was told Mr. Noriega's friend, Mr. Wittgreen, would be handling the shah's security.
It wouldn't be a good idea to indict him -- much less Mr. Noriega, the prosecutor was told.
After prodding from Mr. Sanford, U.S. Attorney Jack Eskenazi pleaded with Justice Department officials in Washington to let the indictment proceed.
"Unfortunately," Mr. Eskenazi wrote in a letter, "those of us in law enforcement in Miami find ourselves frequently attempting to enforce the laws of the United States but simultaneously being caught between foreign policy considerations over which we have no control."
The letter, along with a detailed prosecution memo, sat on the desks of Justice officials for months before the case died a quiet death.
"I think if we had been allowed to go ahead then we wouldn't have the problems we have now," Mr. Sanford says.
"If he had been found guilty, we could have stopped him."
In August 1983, Mr. Noriega took over as General and de-facto dictator of Panama, having maneuvered his way to the top only two years after the mysterious death in a plane crash of his old boss Omar Torrijos.
Soon, the military became a veritable mafia controlling legal and illegal businesses.
The Reagan administration also put Mr. Noriega's G-2 back on the U.S. payroll.
Payments averaged nearly $200,000 a year from the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency and the CIA.
Although working for U.S. intelligence, Mr. Noriega was hardly helping the U.S. exclusively.
During the Reagan years he expanded his business and intelligence contacts with the Cubans and the Sandinistas.
He allegedly entered into Panama's first formal business arrangement with Colombian drug bosses, according to Floyd Carlton, a pilot who once worked for Mr. Noriega and who testified before the U.S. grand jury in Miami that would ultimately indict the Panamanian on drug charges.
But Mr. Noriega was convinced the Reagan White House wouldn't act against him, recalls his close ally Jose Blandon, because he had an insurance policy: his involvement with the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Mr. Blandon says the general allowed the Contras to set up a secret training center in Panama.
Mr. Noriega also conveyed intelligence from his spy operation inside the Nicaraguan capital of Managua.
And on at least one occasion, in the spring of 1985, he helped arrange a sabotage attack on a Sandinista arsenal in Nicaragua.
Although his help for the Contra cause was limited, it was enough to win him important protectors in the Reagan administration, says Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who then served on the Senate Intelligence Committee.
"Noriega played U.S. intelligence agencies and the U.S. government like a violin," he says.
An incident in 1984 suggested one additional means by which Mr. Noriega might have maintained such influence with Washington -- by compromising U.S. officials.
Curtin Windsor, then the ambassador to Costa Rica, recalls being invited to Panama by Mr. Noriega's brother Luis Carlos for a weekend of deep sea fishing and "quiet, serious conversation" on the Aswara Peninsula.
Mr. Windsor notified Everett E. Briggs, the U.S. ambassador to Panama, of the invitation.
"Briggs screamed," Mr. Windsor recalls.
He says Mr. Briggs told him he was being set up for a "honey trap," in which Mr. Noriega would try to involve him in an orgy and then record the event "with sound and video."
Mr. Briggs, on vacation after resigning his position at the National Security Council, couldn't be reached for comment.
As Mr. Noriega's political troubles grew, so did his offers of assistance to the Contras, an apparent attempt to curry more favor in Washington.
For instance, he helped steal the May 1984 Panamanian elections for the ruling party.
But just one month later, he also contributed $100,000 to a Contra leader, according to documents released for Oliver North's criminal trial in Washington, D.C.
Yet, his political setbacks mounted.
Mr. Noriega was accused of ordering in 1985 the beheading of Hugo Spadafora, his most outspoken political opponent and the first man to publicly finger Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
He then ousted President Nicholas Ardito Barletta, a former World Bank official with close ties to the U.S., after Mr. Barletta tried to create a commission to investigate the murder.
And, all the while, Panama's debt problems continued to grow.
Mr. Noriega was growing desperate.
In late 1986, he made an offer he thought the U.S. couldn't refuse.
As recounted in a stipulation that summarized government documents released for the North trial, Mr. Noriega offered to assassinate the Sandinista leadership in exchange "for a promise to help clean up Noriega's image and a commitment to lift the {U.S.} ban on military sales to the Panamanian Defense Forces."
"North," the document went on, referring to Oliver North, "has told Noriega's representative that U.S. law forbade such actions.
The representative responded that Noriega had numerous assets in place in Nicaragua and could accomplish many essential things, just as Noriega had helped {the U.S.} the previous year in blowing up a Sandinista arsenal."
Col. North conveyed the request to his superiors and to Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams, who relayed it to Secretary of State George Shultz.
Mr. Noriega's proposal was turned down.
And Mr. Shultz curtly told Mr. Abrams that the general should be told that only he could repair his tarnished image.
The end of the marriage was at hand.
Within weeks the unfolding Iran-Contra scandal took away Mr. Noriega's insurance policy.
The death of CIA Director William Casey and resignation of Oliver North allowed anti-Noriega political forces to gain influence.
Public protests against him were triggered in June 1987 due to charges by Diaz Herrera, his former chief of staff, that Mr. Noriega had stolen the 1984 election and had ordered the killing of Messrs. Spadafora and Torrijos.
Few American officials were willing any longer to defend him.
Lawyers in Miami -- this time working virtually without impediment -- prepared to have him indicted on drug charges in February 1988.
During negotiations with American officials in May 1988 over proposals to drop the U.S. indictments in exchange for his resignation, Mr. Noriega often asked almost plaintively how the Americans, whom he had helped for so many years, could turn against him.
Now, neither side -- the U.S. nor Mr. Noriega -- has an easy out.
President Bush has sworn to bring him to justice.
Mr. Noriega believes he hasn't any alternative but to continue clutching to power.
It is a knock-out battle -- perhaps to the death.
In the end, is Mr. Noriega the political equivalent of Frankenstein's monster, created by a well-intentioned but misguided foreign power?
Not quite, Sen. Leahy contends.
"For short-term gains, people were willing to put up with him.
That allowed him to get stronger and stronger," he says.
"I don't think we created him as much as we fed him, nurtured him and let him grow up to be big and strong."
The nations of southern Africa know a lot about managing elephants; their herds are thriving.
But the nations of Europe and North America have decided they know better.
At this week's U.N. conference in Lausanne, they imposed a global ivory ban that seeks to overturn local policies.
A Zimbabwean delegate argued that the ban would "guarantee the extinction of the elephant."
Legitimate ranchers, who have an interest in preserving the herds, would go out of business.
Poachers would control the underground trade.
Many delegates were willing to craft a compromise, but U.S. delegate Constance Harriman and others thundered that down.
The Greens from the First World wanted a morality play, not a negotiation.
Fortunately, the nations of southern Africa haven't totally surrendered their sovereignty.
Five countries announced they would not honor what one Zimbabwean delegate wryly called the "made in Switzerland" solution.
In fact, they seemed a mite resentful.
The director of Zimbabwe's Wildlife Department described American conservationists as "fat little puppies from urban environments who don't know a thing about Africa."
That's not fair; they're not all fat.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev wants to bring the nation's reformist press back into line, blaming it for contributing to the many problems he faces and even suggesting that one liberal editor resign.
Mr. Gorbachev's comments, made at a meeting with Soviet national editors and media executives Friday, indicate his growing frustration with the nation's mounting problems.
According to people who attended, he didn't advocate an end to glasnost, his policy of openness.
But he made clear that the press should show greater responsibility in its reporting and cut back on criticism of his reforms.
The text of his remarks hasn't been published, and editors say they have no instructions as to whether it will be.
Accounts of previous such meetings with media and other groups have been printed, sometimes after a delay of several days.
Although glasnost has given the government-controlled media here much greater freedom to report and criticize, Mr. Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders still regard newspapers and TV as important propaganda tools they can use at will.
According to participants at the meeting and Soviet journalists who were later briefed by their editors, Mr. Gorbachev blamed the press for fueling a nationwide mood of despondency.
In particular, he complained about some articles this summer that openly discussed the possibility of a coup or civil war in the Soviet Union, and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by printing stories about impending shortages.
He singled out the daily Izvestia and the weekly Argumenty i Fakty, and also gave stinging criticism of Yuri Afanasyev, a leading reformist historian who has written articles attacking the Communist Party.
Among other things, Mr. Gorbachev questioned whether Mr. Afanasyev should remain in the party.
The meeting lasted a little under two hours and was attended by most members of the ruling Politburo.
There was no other speaker apart from the Soviet leader, and those attacked weren't given the opportunity to defend themselves.
Mr. Afanasyev, who isn't an editor, didn't attend.
According to participants, Mr. Gorbachev was particularly incensed by an article on the front page of Argumenty i Fakty this month that examined the popularity of members of the Soviet Parliament.
The piece was based on a survey of 1,500 readers' letters and contained some criticism of Mr. Gorbachev himself.
The newspaper wrote that readers assessed his role both positively and negatively.
It said many thanked the Soviet leader for his "self-control, modesty, culture and ability to hear a speaker out."
But others criticized him, "for imposing his opinion on other deputies, giving commentaries to many speeches, holding elections with no choice of candidate, putting pressure on the voting process and maneuvering between the right and left wings" of the Parliament.
All this, the paper quoted readers as saying, "has seriously weakened his authority."
The Soviet leader apparently suggested to Argumenty i Fakty's editor, Vyacheslav Starkov, that he should resign.
The comment, which Mr. Starkov relayed to his staff, has sparked anger and bitterness at the paper.
Mr. Starkov has been summoned to see the Kremlin's ideology chief, Vadim Medvedev, in the near future, and may discover then if he is to be fired.
Izvestia was criticized for a front-page article last Wednesday that took a sharp look at the Parliament's activities.
It attacked the level of a debate on the private-sector cooperative movement, saying "the discussion was more like a riot than a civilized exchange of points of view."
And it questioned the speed with which the Parliament was adopting new legislation, often with a minimum of debate.
Speaking to foreign reporters, Ivan Laptev, Izvestia's editor, sought to play down Mr. Gorbachev's criticism, but he acknowledged that his paper had been singled out.
The Parliament yesterday approved legislation that imposes new restrictions on the cooperative movement, enabling local authorities to set ceilings for prices and preventing the "speculative" sale of goods in short supply for prices higher than that charged by the state.
Walter Sisulu and the African National Congress came home yesterday.
After 26 years in prison, Mr. Sisulu, the 77-year-old former secretary-general of the liberation movement, was dropped off at his house by a prison services' van just as the sun was coming up.
At the same time, six ANC colleagues, five of whom were arrested with him in 1963 and sentenced to life imprisonment, were reunited with their families at various places around the country.
And as the graying men returned to their homes, the ANC, outlawed in South Africa since 1960 and still considered to be the chief public enemy by the white government, defiantly returned to the streets of the country's black townships.
A huge ANC flag, with black, green and gold stripes, was hoisted over the rickety gate at Mr. Sisulu's modest house, while on the street out front, boys displayed the ANC colors on their shirts, caps and scarves.
At the small four-room home of Elias Motsoaledi, a leading ANC unionist and a former commander in the group's armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, well-wishers stuck little ANC flags in their hair and a man tooted on an antelope horn wrapped in ANC ribbons.
"I am happy to see the spirit of the people," said Mr. Sisulu, looking dapper in a new gray suit.
As the crowd outside his home shouted "ANC, ANC," the old man shot his fists into the air.
"I'm inspired by the mood of the people."
Under the laws of the land, the ANC remains an illegal organization, and its headquarters are still in Lusaka, Zambia.
But the unconditional release of the seven leaders, who once formed the intellectual and organizational core of the ANC, is a de facto un-banning of the movement and the rebirth of its internal wing.
"The government can never put the ANC back into the bottle again," said Cassim Saloojee, a veteran anti-apartheid activist on hand to welcome Mr. Sisulu.
"Things have gone too far for the government to stop them now.
There's no turning back."
There was certainly no stopping the tide of ANC emotion last night, when hundreds of people jammed into the Holy Cross Anglican Church in Soweto for what became the first ANC rally in the country in 30 years.
Deafening chants of "ANC" and "Umkhonto we Sizwe" shook the church as the seven aging men vowed that the ANC would continue its fight against the government and the policies of racial segregation on all fronts, including the armed struggle.
And they called on the government to release Nelson Mandela, the ANC's leading figure, who was jailed with them and remains in prison.
Without him, said Mr. Sisulu, the freeing of the others "is only a half-measure."
President F.W. de Klerk released the ANC men -- along with one of the founding members of the Pan Africanist Congress, a rival liberation group -- as part of his efforts to create a climate of trust and peace in which his government can begin negotiations with black leaders over a new constitution aimed at giving blacks a voice in national government.
But Pretoria may instead be creating a climate for more turmoil and uncertainty in this racially divided country.
As other repressive governments, particularly Poland and the Soviet Union, have recently discovered, initial steps to open up society can create a momentum for radical change that becomes difficult, if not impossible, to control.
As the days go by, the South African government will be ever more hard pressed to justify the continued imprisonment of Mr. Mandela as well as the continued banning of the ANC and enforcement of the state of emergency.
If it doesn't yield on these matters, and eventually begin talking directly to the ANC, the expectations and promise raised by yesterday's releases will turn to disillusionment and unrest.
If it does, the large number of right-wing whites, who oppose any concessions to the black majority, will step up their agitation and threats to take matters into their own hands.
The newly released ANC leaders also will be under enormous pressure.
The government is watching closely to see if their presence in the townships leads to increased anti-government protests and violence; if it does, Pretoria will use this as a reason to keep Mr. Mandela behind bars.
Pretoria hasn't forgotten why they were all sentenced to life imprisonment in the first place: for sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government.
In addition, the government is figuring that the releases could create a split between the internal and external wings of the ANC and between the newly freed leaders and those activists who have emerged as leaders inside the country during their imprisonment.
In order to head off any divisions, Mr. Mandela, in a meeting with his colleagues before they were released, instructed them to report to the ANC headquarters in Lusaka as soon as possible.
The men also will be faced with bridging the generation gap between themselves and the country's many militant black youths, the so-called young lions who are anxious to see the old lions in action.
Says Peter Mokaba, president of the South African Youth Congress: "We will be expecting them to act like leaders of the ANC."
They never considered themselves to be anything else.
At last night's rally, they called on their followers to be firm, yet disciplined, in their opposition to apartheid.
"We emphasize discipline because we know that the government is very, very sensitive," said Andrew Mlangeni, another early Umkhonto leader who is now 63.
"We want to see Nelson Mandela and all our comrades out of prison, and if we aren't disciplined we may not see them here with us."
We don't know who is winning the drug war in Latin America, but we know who's losing it -- the press.
Over the past six months, six journalists have been killed and 10 kidnapped by drug traffickers or leftist guerrillas -- who often are one and the same -- in Colombia.
Over the past 12 years, at least 40 journalists have died there.
The attacks have intensified since the Colombian government began cracking down on the traffickers in August, trying to prevent their takeover of the country.
The slaughter in Colombia was very much on the minds of 450 editors and publishers from Latin America, the United States, the Caribbean and Canada attending the 45th general assembly of the Inter-American Press Association in Monterrey, Mexico, this week.
On Tuesday the conference got word of another atrocity, the assassination in Medellin of two employees of El Espectador, Colombia's second-largest newspaper.
The paper's local administrator, Maria Luz Lopez, was shot dead, and her mother wounded, while her car was stopped for a red light.
An hour later, the paper's circulation manager, Miguel Soler, was shot and killed near his home.
The drug lords who claimed responsibility said they would blow up the Bogota newspaper's offices if it continued to distribute in Medellin.
They bombed the Bogota offices last month, destroying its computer and causing $2.5 million in damage.
El Espectador has been a special target because of the extraordinary courage of its publisher and his staff.
At Monterrey, publisher Luis Gabriel Cano, although shaken by the murders, issued a statement saying: "We will not cease our fight against drug trafficking.
They want to terrify the press and in particular El Espectador because it has always been a torchbearer in this war."
This comes from a man whose brother, Guillermo, was murdered in 1986.
The publishers in Monterrey command no battalions, but they agreed to express their outrage with editorials in today's editions.
Many will use a common editorial.
A final statement yesterday said: "While some advances are being made in nations throughout the hemisphere, the state of press freedom in the Americas still must be regarded as grim as long as journalists and their families are subject to the crudest form of censorship: death by assassination."
The report charged that Panama's Manuel Noriega is not only in league with the drug traffickers but also is bullying the press as never before.
"Noriega has closed every independent newspaper, radio and television station and arrested, tortured or forced into exile a long list of reporters," the statement declared.
It added: "In Cuba, public enemy No. 1 of press freedoms in the hemisphere, repression of journalists both Cuban and foreign is worse than ever."
And in Nicaragua, promises of press freedom by the Sandinistas "have not materialized."
As it happens, the four countries cited, Colombia, Cuba, Panama and Nicaragua, are not only where the press is under greatest attack but also are linked by the drug trade and left-wing politics.
Noriega is close to Castro and may once have been his agent.
Sandinistas Thomas Borge and the Ortega brothers are Castro proteges; he backed their takeover of Nicaragua.
In Colombia, the drug-financed guerrillas trying to seize the country and destroy democracy include M-19, which Castro has clearly backed.
Robert Merkel, a former U.S. attorney handling drug indictments in Florida, doesn't think for a minute that Castro's much publicized trials of high officials engaged in the drug trade mean he has broken off with the Medellin drug cartel.
"If the cartel succeeds in blackmailing the Colombian authorities into negotiations, the cartel will be in control and Fidel can exploit his past relationships with them," he told the Journal's David Asman recently.
The struggle against the drug lords in Colombia will be a near thing.
This week, the government arrested Jose Abello Silva, said to be the fourth-ranking cartel leader.
He will probably be extradited to the U.S. for trial under an extradition treaty President Virgilia Barco has revived.
Later, another high-ranking trafficker, Leonidas Vargas, was arrested and 1,000 pounds of dynamite seized.
Mr. Barco has refused U.S. troops or advisers but has accepted U.S. military aid.
President Bush has agreed to meet within 90 days with Mr. Barco, President Alan Garcia of Peru and President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia to discuss the drug problem.
It might not be a bad idea to do that sooner, rather than later.
After the Panama fiasco, they will need some reassurance.
Certainly, the Colombian press is much in need of that.
But the sense of urgency for this meeting matches the rage felt by both Israelis and Palestinians after yesterday's violence.
Today Israel buried one of its two soldiers beaten to death bay a mob of Palestinians yesterday.
Today in Jerusalem, Israeli security forces barred Palestinians under the age of 45 from praying at the al-Aqsa mosque.
Young Palestinians prayed outside and some young men were asked and beaten by Israeli police which may help make clear why arranging a summit is so difficult.
And why the political leaders will have such a hard time keeping the streets -- getting the streets calm.
ABC's Gillian Findlay reports tonight from Palestinian Gaza.
On the streets of Gaza today, talk of summits and peace was the last thing many Palestinians wanted to hear.
Only a day after Israeli missiles destroyed two police boats here, one of them very close to Mr. Arafat's own office.
Today, Israel released footage of yesterday's other attacks shot from inside a helicopter gun ship.
These missiles landed in the city of Ramallah.
With Israeli gun boats continuing to control the coast today, Gaza police were taking no chances.
Abandoning their stations for the city's main square.
What Israel did yesterday has turned anger here to fury.
It is war, Palestinians say, and Mr. Arafat has no business talking peace.
You want a war?
Yes.
Why?
I hope.
Why?
Because no peace.
After all this, no peace.
At another rally in Georgia today, Islamic leaders called openly for terror attacks on Israel.
Extremist groups have a lot of support these days and a lot of power.
This afternoon, a crowd of angry Muslims set fire to a hotel and to homes of people who they say sold alcohol.
Palestinian police did little to stop them.
Even if Mr. Arafat goes to a summit, and even if he signs an agreement, there is no guarantee any more that his people will listen.
Gillian Findlay, ABC News, Gaza.
At the bottom of the sea.
Two months after the submarine "Kursk" went down with 118 men on board, divers have managed to get inside.
They found five bodies so far.
And today, they found a note, written after a pair of explosions ripped through the hull and sent the "Kursk" into the depths of the Barents see.
Here's ABC's bob woodruff.
The note was discovered by divers inside one compartment of the submarine, on the body of 27-year-old lieutenant captain Dmitry Kolesnikov, photographed here on board the "Kursk" three years ago.
"I am writing blindly," he wrote apparently in darkness.
"None of us can get to the surface."
Russian officials believe the note was written at least two hours after the sub began to sink.
"All the crew from the sixth, seventh and eighth compartments went over to the ninth."
Kolesnikov wrote, "There are 23 people here.
We made this decision as a result of the accident."
The note contains no new evidence about what sank the "Kursk," whether it was an internal explosion or a collision.
But it does contradict the official Russian version that was given to family members, that all 118 men had died instantly.
Today, the chief of Russia's navy was forced to admit to the families he was wrong, that some of the crew not only survived, according to Kolesnikov's note,
Two or three tried to get out through the escape hatch.
But it may have been flooded.
Today, Kolesnikov's widow could not hold back her tears.
"It's horribly painful, it's awful," she said.
"I had a feeling that he didn't die immediately, and it turned out my feeling was right."
She also says her husband had a premonition.
Last summer, before he went to sea, he gave her his dog tag and a crucifix, and said he may not be coming back.
Bob Woodruff, ABC news, London.
In news overseas, at a United Nations environmental summit in Johannesburg, South Africa, representatives from 122 nations signed an agreement banning the use of 12 highly toxic chemicals.
Among them, dioxins and other chemicals, which are known as "the dirty dozen."
They have been linked to cancer, birth defects, and other genetic abnormalities.
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets across the Middle East Thursday, demonstrating against military strikes on Iraq and calling on Muslims to wage jihad against the United States and its allies.
Lebanon and the Palestinian Authority issued fierce denunciations of the US-led attacks, while the Egyptian government daily Al-Ahram warned it marked "the beginning an era of US colonisation that will benefit only Israel".
Protests against the action aimed at toppling Iraqi President Saddam Hussein were held in cities across Libya, Egypt and Lebanon, as well as in Amman, Damascus and the Gaza Strip.
However, there were no reports of protests against the war from the Gulf states, many of whom are host to US military personnel.
Saudi Arabia, however, expressed its "deep concern" and regret over the start of US military operations.
Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal spoke of the "kingdom's hope for a quick halt in military action and for the return to peaceful efforts", the state SPA news agency reported.
In Riyadh's first reaction to the start of the against, he also called for Iraq's "unity, internal security and territorial integrity" to be preserved and rejected military occupation.
Lebanese President Emile Lahoud, meanwhile, was more forthright, strongly denouncing Washington's "aggression" and warning that it could have repercussions beyond the borders of the pariah state.
"We have warned against the marginalisation of the United Nations ... and we see this aggression today plunging the world into a tunnel where one cannot see the end," he said in a statement.
"For these reasons, we judge that it is necessary that the forces of peace and those who believe in right and justice take the necessary and rapid steps to halt this dangerous slide into war against Iraq which will result in heavy human and material losses."
The Palestinian Authority also condemned Thursday's early morning missile strikes on Iraq, and warned Israel not to exploit the conflict.
"We Palestinians are against the war and we totally condemn this war in the Middle East.
A solution must be found to this problem through diplomatic means, with the international community," local authorities minister Saeb Erakat said.
"We are warning Israel not to exploit this war against Iraq to carry out more attacks against the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and destroy the Palestinian Authority and the peace process," he said.
The radical Palestinian movement Islamic Jihad warned that "the war against Iraq is a war against the whole region", while Hamas issued a chilling warning against those taking part in the war against Iraq.
"The aggression by the vile Americans and the war against Iraq signifies a war against all Arabs and Muslims around the world," said Hamas senior official Abdul Aziz al-Rantissi.
The war "shows the impotence of all Arab states.
We call on all Arab states to act immediately to defend Iraq and counter the US war," he said.
"I don't think America will win this war, as our jihad (holy war) and our resistance will teach the Americans and British a lesson they will never forget," he said.
State radio in Syria accused the United States and its allies of wanting to get their "hands on Iraq's oil and wealth and impose their hegemony on the world".
In the Egyptian capital, 10 demonstrators and at least four policeman were injured in clashes after several thousand demonstrators took to the streets near the US and British embassies.
Riot police intervened after the protestors, who included hundreds of students from the American University in Cairo, rallied on the city's central Tahrir Square, close to both the university campus and the US embassy.
More than 1,000 people also gathered at Cairo's Al-Azhar Islamic University, where they burned an American flag and demanded the expulsion of the ambassadors of the United States, Britain, Spain and Israel.
Demonstrations also took place in the northern Egyptian cities of Alexandria, Tanta and Kafr el-Sheikh.
In Amman, three protestors were hospitalised after some 500 Jordanian lawyers staged a sit-in at the main court house after being forcibly blocked by riot police from marching towards the Iraqi embassy to show their solidarity.
In Lebanon, hundreds of students gathered on the campuses of the Arab University of Beirut and the American University of Beirut calling for the assassination of US President George W. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
South of the capital in Sidon, some 1,500 schoolboys denounced "the Bush assassin" and the "silence of the Arab leaders who sold out Iraq".
Fifteen people were killed and more than 30 wounded Wednesday as a suicide bomber blew himself up on a student bus in the northern town of Haifa, the first bombing in Israel in exactly two months.
Several hours later, dozens of Israeli tanks advanced into the northern Gaza Strip backed by helicopters which fired at least three rockets in the Jabaliya area, Palestinian security sources said.
Palestinian medical sources said 60-year-old Mohammed al-Biyari was killed in his home near Jabaliya refugee camp by the rocket fire and another wounded.
A second rocket landed in farmlands and the other hit a house inside the refugee camp, but without causing further casualties, Palestinian security sources said.
Two 13-year-old children were among those killed in the Haifa bus bombing, Israeli public radio said, adding that most of the victims were youngsters.
The army said two soldiers were also among the dead.
The bus was ripped to shreds while travelling between a residential area and Haifa university.
Of the 33 injured still in hospital late Wednesday, two were in intensive care and six others in serious condition, the radio said.
Israel's night-time raid in Gaza involving around 40 tanks and armoured vehicles came after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon convened his security cabinet to discuss a response to the bomb attack.
Israeli media said the retaliation was unlikely to be on a scale that would risk disrupting US preparations for war on Iraq.
The Palestinian suicide bomber on the Haifa bus came from the southern West Bank town of Hebron, public radio said, naming him as 20-year-old Mahmoud Hamadan Salim Qawasmi.
Apart from his ID card, also found in the wreckage were the remains of a letter allegedly outlining his plan to carry out a suicide attack and praising the September 2001 destruction of the World Trade Centre in New York, it said.
Israeli police were not immediately available for comment, but Palestinian sources in Hebron said Mahmoud Qawasmi was a 21-year-old student with links to the Islamic radical group Hamas.
Israeli forces moved into Hebron's Al-Sheikh district where his family lived and arrested Qawasmi's brother and father after the bombing, they said.
Without claiming responsibility, Hamas and another hardline group, Islamic Jihad, said the blast was revenge for a string of bloody Israeli army raids into the Gaza Strip in recent weeks.
But the Palestinian Authority condemned the attack, saying it would divert international sympathy away from the far higher Palestinian civilian death toll.
"We condemn all attacks against civilians including today's attack in Haifa," said information minister Yasser Abed Rabbo.
The Palestinian leadership said the attack would serve as "a pretext for Israel's government and occupation army to step up its deadly campaign which caused the deaths of 77 Palestinians in February".
It was the first bomb attack inside Israel since January 5, and came just days after the hawkish Sharon appointed the most right-wing government in Israel's history on a pledge to get tough on security.
In the January attack, two Palestinian suicide bombers blew themselves up in central Tel Aviv, killing 23 other people.
Israeli government spokesman Avi Pazner called the latest deadly blast a "very grave attack" and said the Jewish state would take "vigorous action against the terrorist organisations".
He told AFP that Israeli intelligence had been dealing with at least 40 tip-offs of impending attacks when the Haifa bus was blown up.
US President George W. Bush condemned the "attack on innocents in Israel," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said, adding that "his message to the terrorists is: Their efforts will not be succcessful.
"He will continue to pursue the path to peace in the Middle East."
EU foreign policy supremo Javier Solana likewise slammed the attack, although he also took a jab at Israel, saying, "There have been too many civilians killed in the last weeks and the last days."
In London, a spokesman for the British prime minister said Tony Blair "condemns absolutely what has happened".
The spokesman added that he "would obviously call on all sides to do what they can to break the cycle of violence, because it is only through engagement that we can realise the vision everyone wants to see.
"There needs to be dialogue in order for this to be resolved."
The bus attack came just two days after Israeli forces staged a bloody raid into a refugee camp in central Gaza targeting a founding member of Hamas, which has spearheaded suicide bombings against the Jewish state.
Hamas vowed to continue its attacks, while the Palestinian Authority accused Israel of trying to disrupt top-level Palestinian meetings to discuss reforms of Arafat's administration.
Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erakat said international intervention was needed to break the cycle of violence.
Eight people, including a pregnant woman and a 13-year-old child were killed in Monday's Gaza raid, provoking US-led international calls for Israeli restraint.
And on Tuesday, Israeli troops shot dead an elderly Palestinian shepherd outside a Jewish settlement on the edge of Gaza City.
In the West Bank, an eight-year-old Palestinian boy as well as his brother and a sister were wounded late Wednesday by Israeli gunfire in a village north of the town of Ramallah, their elder sister said.
Thousands of fresh US troops headed for Iraq Thursday as British Prime Minister Tony Blair and US President George W. Bush discussed the effort to oust Saddam Hussein, which some senior US military officials warn could last months.
About 1,000 soldiers from the US Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade parachuted into an airfield in a Kurdish-controlled area of northern Iraq, establishing a base through which to bring in more troops and tanks, Pentagon officials said.
And some 12,000 soldiers from the US Army's 4th Infantry Division, which was supposed to have gone into northern Iraq through Turkey, began flying out of Fort Hood, Texas, Thursday to the region, a military fort spokeswoman told AFP.
The soldiers are to meet up with ships transporting their equipment, which is arriving in Kuwait from the Mediterranean, where it had been idling for weeks on navy ships awaiting Turkey's decision.
The war in Iraq could last months and require considerable US military reinforcements to assure a victory, the Washington Post reported Thursday, quoting senior US military officials.
Sandstorms, dangerously long supply lines and a recalcitrant enemy "has led to abroad reassessment by some top generals of US military expectations and timelines," the Post reports.
"Tell me how this ends," one senior officer asked the Post.
Most US army commanders believe it is critical to pause the breakneck advance towards Baghdad to secure the supply lines and make sure weapons are operable and troops resupplied after days of powerful sandstorms and damage inflicted by Iraqi attacks, the Post reports.
The Post also quoted Central Intelligence Agency and Pentagon intelligence analysts complaining that Bush officials largely ignored their warning that Iraqi irregular forces would use guerrilla tactics and offer significant resistance.
Publicly US officials have insisted that the war is going according to plan, and the most advanced US forces are currently some 100 kilometers (60 miles) outside of Baghdad.
US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld dismissed worries that there were insufficient forces in the Gulf region if the battle for Baghdad goes wrong.
After briefing US senators on the war, Rumsfeld told reporters that the number of forces "has been increasing and it will continue to do so until it is finished."
Meanwhile Blair arrived in Washington late Wednesday for two days of talks with Bush at the Camp David presidential retreat.
Talks were to focus on how to run a post-Saddam Iraq, with Washington resisting a large United Nations role.
Blair faces an uphill battle to win Bush over to giving the UN oversight of a post-Saddam administration, as Washington officials are still angry at Germany, Russia, and especially France, over the failure to secure UN Security Council approval for military action.
Blair and Bush were to hold a joint press conference at 1600 GMT Thursday.
Britain has deployed some 45,000 troops to fight with the more than 250,000 US soldiers lined up against Iraqi troops.
Bush gave a new, stronger warning that the war could become drawn out.
"As they approach Baghdad, our fighting units are facing the most desperate elements of a doomed regime," Bush told cheering military personnel Wednesday at the Florida headquarters of Central Command, which is running the campaign.
"We cannot predict the final day of the Iraqi regime, but I can assure you -- and I assure the long-suffering people of Iraq -- there will be a day of reckoning for the Iraqi regime, and that day is drawing near," he said.
At the last minute, Bush withdrew a phrase in his speech saying the campaign was "ahead of schedule."
A senior administration official said the president had decided to be cautious.
Bush pointedly paid tribute to the 48-nation "coalition of the willing" -- particularly Britain -- that is publicly backing the campaign.
Separately, US Secretary of State Colin Powell emphasized US determination to pursue the military campaign despite the diplomatic pressure Washington faces at the United Nations.
"We are interested in concluding this conflict, not having a pause right now or stopping right now, but concluding this as quickly as possible so we can get on with the rebuilding of Iraq and putting in place a better system of governance," Powell said in an interview with the Al-Jazeera Arab
television network.
Powell, the most moderate member of the Bush cabinet, said he fully agreed with the president's policy on Iraq and had no plans to leave.
"Personally, I'm very much in sync with the president and he values my services," he said in an interview with National Public Radio.
Meanwhile the Wall Street Journal reported that several British and US oil companies have quietly advised US and British forces on how oil fields operate so they could safeguard the fields in Iraq.
The companies, including Britain's BP PLC and the Texas-based Boots and Coots International Well Control Inc., were not paid for their consultations, but allied military engineers said their advice was critical.
Some 2,500 mainly university students formed a human chain in Japanese characters spelling out "No War" in Osaka on Sunday to protest against the ongoing US-led military campaign in Iraq.
"We cannot forgive this war," Miyako Fuji, 20, one of the rally's organisers told Jiji news agency.
"I want to join together the feelings of each of us as individuals who oppose the war."
Protesters, who exceeded the 2,000 expected to show up at the park at Osaka Castle in the city's downtown neighbourhood, carried placards that read "Stop war" and "Love and Peace" while forming the human chain after 3:00 pm (0600 GMT), Jiji said.
The protest follows a string of others involving tens of thousands of peace activists across Japan since January.
According to a poll by Kyodo news agency released Saturday, 78 of 100 people surveyed opposed the military action in Iraq.
A separate poll of 1,846 adults by the leading Yomiuri newspaper published Tuesday showed 64 percent felt Japan had "no choice" but to back the United States, with only 12 percent saying Japan had "every reason" to back the war.
 British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown on Tuesday named the current head of the country's energy regulator as the new chairman of finance watchdog the Financial Services Authority (FSA)
Former senior banker Callum McCarthy begins what is one of the most important jobs in London's financial world in September, when incumbent Howard Davies steps down.
Davies is leaving to become chairman of the London School of Economics, one of the best-known parts of the University of London.
Brown said McCarthy would bring to the FSA "an unrivalled combination of experience of the public sector, experience as a senior practitioner in the financial services industry, and chairman of a highly successful regulator."
McCarthy currently heads the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, or Ofgem, which regulates Britain's privatised energy industry.
As well as previously holding senior positions at Barclays Bank, BZW and Kleinwort Benson, McCarthy was formerly a top civil servant at the Department of Trade and Industry.
Under Davies's watch, the FSA became Britain's sole regulatory body for financial services in November 2001, taking on the various functions of nine separate agencies.
At least three members of a family in Indias northeastern state of Tripura were hacked to death by a tribal mob for allegedly practicing witchcraft, police said Thursday.
A spokesman said a group of 25 to 30 armed men Wednesday attacked a house belonging to a village quack doctor in Tultuli, 60 kilometers (38 miles) south of Tripuras state capital Agartala.
"The mob dragged out three members of a family and (killed) them with machetes and spears before fleeing the area," the spokesman said by telephone from Agartala.
The dead included the quack doctor, 55-year-old Nityalila Naotia, his teenaged son and another member of the family, whom he did not identify.
"It was believed Naotia was a practicing sorcerer and through his black magic he had cast evil spells on villagers, prompting a group within the village to eliminate them," the spokesman said.
Police have arrested four people in connection with the killings.
Superstitious beliefs, black magic and demonology are integral to the tribal custom in parts of Tripura and other northeast Indian states.
Many tribes practice faiths believed to be a mix of black magic and superstition.
A Pakistani court in central Punjab province has sentenced a Christian man to life imprisonment for a blasphemy conviction, police said Sunday.
Judge Shahid Rafiq, of the district court in the industrial city of Faisalabad, found Ranjha Masih guilty of defiling Koranic verses during a protest rally by the minority Christian community in 1998.
In a verdict handed down on Saturday, the judge also ordered Ranjha to pay a fine of 50,000 rupees (about 870 US dollars), they said.
Ranjha was accused of tearing down a billboard carrying verses from the Koran in Faisalabad during a Christian demonstration after the city's bishop committed suicide over the 1985 blasphemy law.
Faisalabad's Catholic Bishop John Joseph, who had been campaigning against the law, shot himself in the head outside a court in Sahiwal district when the judge convicted Christian Ayub Masih under the law in 1998.
Ayub Masih was charged in 1996 with blasphemy for allegedly defending British author Salman Rushdie, whose novel "The Satanic Verses" infuriated radical Mulsim clerics who accused the author of defaming Islam.
The Pakistani supreme court last year aquitted Ayub Masih, who had denied uttering any word against Islam or the Prophet Mohammad.
Blasphemy is punishable by death under the Pakistan Penal Code.
However, no blasphemy convict has ever been executed in the country.
Christian rights activists campaigning against the laws, introduced by late military dictator General Zia-ul Haq, say they are mainly used to persecute Christians or to settle feuds over land.
Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom on Wednesday stressed Qatar's role in the Middle East peace process during talks with his Qatari counterpart Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani in Paris.
Shalom told a joint press conference that the tiny Gulf state's strong relationship with the recently appointed Palestinian prime minister, Mahmud Abbas, could be a boost for peace.
"We discussed the Middle East peace process.
Over an hour of talks, we asserted the will of both parties (Israel and the Arab world) to do everything to return to the negotiating table," Shalom said.
"Qatar is a very important country on this issue.
I know the special relationship that the Qatari foreign minister has with Abu Mazen," he said, using Abbas's alternative name.
The meeting was Shalom's first encounter with an Arab counterpart since he took office as Israel's foreign minister on February 27.
Qatar has economic links with Israel without maintaining diplomatic relations, in the face of criticism from other Arab countries.
Afterwards Shalom was to fly on to London for talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw.
US President George W. Bush told Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien by telephone Monday that he looked forward to seeing him at the upcoming summit of major industrialized nations and Russia, the White House said Tuesday.
"The two leaders discussed the upcoming G-8 meeting, US-Canada (relations) and other international issues of concern," Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said days before the June 1-3 summit, to be held in France.
"Both said they look forward to seeing each other in Evian.
They also touched on Afghanistan, the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on the global economy," said Fleischer.
Amid a chill in relations over the war in Iraq, which Canada opposed, Bush indefinitely postponed a visit to Canada, instead choosing to host Australian Prime Minster John Howard, who endorsed that military campaign.
On Monday, Chretien told reporters that he and Bush, who had not spoken since late February, discussed a wide range of issues, including Iraq, the upcoming summit of the Group of Eight industrial powers and aid to Africa.
A provincial chief from India’s main opposition congress party has told an election rally that India is suffering nature’s "curse" because both the president and prime minister and bachelors, a report said Saturday.
"We've always been on good terms.
We just disagree on one item," the Canadian leader said.
The Times of India newspaper quoted Digvijay Singh, chief minister of the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, as saying that Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee and President Abdul Kalam had off ended the Hindu rain God Varuna by remaining bachelors.
"Not just Prime Minister Vajpayee but president Kalam’s bachelor status is making the country dry, arid and infertile," he added.
"The country is being ruled by a bachelor president and an unmarried prime minister.
This according to the Hindu shastras (books) is very inauspicious and that is the reason there is a widespread heat wave and drought, "said Singh.
The skeleton of a second baby has been found at a rural Wisconsin home where a 22-year-old woman's dead infant was discovered in a blue plastic container June 8, officials said Monday.
Kristin Scott, the mother, told police she gave birth secretly to both babies at her parents' home in Byrds Creek, Richland County, one of unknown sex in April 2001 and the other, a fullterm girl, January 14.
Police arrested her in Abilene, Texas, Saturday where she had moved with a friend June 2.
She is being held on 50,000 dollars bail on a charge of first-degree reckless homicide and hiding a corpse in the death of the infant born in January.
Scott told police she did not tend to the baby, and it died after 30 minutes.
She said the baby had to die, according to the criminal complaint.
The woman's parents, William and Nancy Scott, found the decomposing body of the first baby in her closet after they went looking for the source of a foul odor in their house.
Scott told investigators she had moved that body around before she moved to Texas, sometimes in the closet at the Byrds Creek house, in the trunk of her car and in the closet of her apartment in Richland Center, the complaint said.
The sheriff released no other details about the second baby.
Palestinian security forces returned Monday to the positions they held in the Gaza Strip before the outbreak of the 33-month Palestinian uprising as Israel removed all major checkpoints in the coastal territory, a Palestinian security source said.
Police officers took up their positions across the Gaza Strip, enjoying a freedom of movement they have not known since the intifada exploded in September 2000, the source said.
"Palestinian police have taken over all the posts and positions they held before September 28, 2000.
It is the first time they have had freedom of movement with cars and weapons since the start of the intifada," the source said.
The move marked a huge step forward in carrying out the US-backed Middle East "roadmap", which aims to end the months of bloodshed and create a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
Following the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the northern town of Beit Hanoun late Sunday, police took up positions there and in the neighbouring town of Beit Lahiya, he said.
They also deployed along the border with Israel.
The handover is a credibility test for the Palestinian Authority, which must show it means business when it comes to reining in hardline groups plotting attacks on the Jewish state.
In another first in the almost three-year intifada, the Israeli army allowed Palestinians free circulation on the trans-Gaza highway as troops abandoned three major checkpoints across the coastal territory.
Traffic was flowing freely through the Netzarim junction, just south of Gaza City, the Kissufim junction by Deir al-Balah in the central Gaza Strip, and the Guest House junction just south of Deir al-Balah after the army withdrew.
The three military checkpoints on the highway, which runs the entire length of the Gaza Strip, had transformed the trip from north to south, ordinarily a 30-minute ride, into a grinding two or three-hour ordeal and came to symbolise the horrors of occupation.
"Israel has implemented most of the agreement except for a few issues," the source said, pointing out that Israel had still not removed two military observation posts at the Kissufim junction and the Guest House junction.
Although there was free movement along the trans-Gaza highway, several other roads remained temporarily closed, he said.
The Karni-Netzarim road, which runs east-to-west across the route, was still closed as was the section of the highway passing close by Kfar Darom settlement, just south of the Guest House junction, he said, adding both were likely to be opened in the coming weeks.
Another road, leading from the southern border town of Rafah to Khan Yunis, would be opened within 10 days, he said.
Adressing Palestinian complaints, an Israeli military source confirmed troops had installed a gate at the Netzarim crossing and at the southern Guest House junction but said that they were only there for when Jewish settlers needed to use the road.
A ban on Palestinian men under the age of 35 being allowed to move freely was still in force but that was expected to be lifted later on Monday or early Tuesday.
The army also handed over control of Rafah border crossing between the Gaza Strip and Egypt to the Palestinians, security sources said.
Six Palestinian police officers were allowed to return to the Palestinian section of the border crossing, which had been taken over by Israeli troops shortly after the start of the uprising.
Under the 1993 Oslo accords, which granted a measure of autonomy to the Palestinians, the Rafah border crossing with Egypt was to be jointly managed by both Israel and the Palestinians, although Israel had final control over the zone.
Although the crossing has, in principle, been open for movement between the two territories -- while being frequently closed by Israeli for reasons rarely explained -- the Palestinian section has been manned by Israel for more than two years.
I wish I could have been at a Pub, or wherever these people convene, to see the reactions from all the Britons who read the Telegraph this morning (emphasis added): Britain's gun laws are aimed at the wrong target, curbing and criminalising legal ownership while failing to tackle huge rises in shooting offences over the past few years, according to an international firearms legislation expert.
Prof Gary Mauser said that Britain was making the same mistake as Canada and Australia in focusing on legal owners - a section of the law-abiding community where gun crimes, such as the Dunblane massacre, were aberrations.
The Home Office and police chiefs should instead tackle the possession of guns in criminal hands, said Prof Mauser, a member of the independent Fraser Institute in Canada.
He has given evidence to select committees of the House of Commons and the Canadian Senate and predicted the escalation of gun crime on Britain's streets.
His warning comes as gun crime incidents are averaging about 29 a day in England and Wales, more than twice the level of when the Labour Government came to power in 1997 .
In the past two years, there have been cases of schoolchildren and a baby, killed or injured by guns.
"I believe that factors of political correctness are at work," he said.
"Police crackdowns, Home Office initiatives and over-regulation of legally held weapons create froth and they may even fool the police themselves into believing they are doing something about gun crime."
Prof Mauser added: "The sad truth is that while the police officers are inspecting farmers' gun cabinets to see if they comply with regulations somewhere in the UK, someone, who has not filled in a firearms certificate form, will be smuggling a gun into the country or selling one to an inner city youth."
Recorded gun crime rose by three per cent to 10,590 incidents in the year to June.
Two-thirds of gun crime takes place in London, Birmingham and Manchester.
It doesn't matter to these people that crime has skyrocketed since the irrational ban on private gun possession went into effect in Great Britain.
Just as long as it's there, they feel safe.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld took part in a Q&A with the troops today that was anything but cozy.
Disgruntled soldiers complained to Rumsfeld about long deployments and a lack of armored vehicles and other equipment.
From the Associated Press : "You go to war with the Army you have," Rumsfeld replied, "not the Army you might want or wish to have."
Spc. Thomas Wilson had asked the defense secretary, "Why do we soldiers have to dig through local landfills for pieces of scrap metal and compromised ballistic glass to up-armor our vehicles?"
Shouts of approval and applause arose from the estimated 2,300 soldiers who had assembled to see Rumsfeld.
"We do not have proper armored vehicles to carry with us north," Wilson, 31, of Nashville, Tenn., concluded after asking again.
Wilson, an airplane mechanic whose unit, the 278th Regimental Combat Team of the Tennessee Army National Guard, is about to drive north into Iraq for a one-year tour of duty, put his finger on a problem that has bedeviled the Pentagon for more than a year.
Rarely, though, is it put so bluntly in a public forum.
Rumsfeld said the Army was sparing no expense or effort to acquire as many Humvees and other vehicles with extra armor as it can.
What is more, he said, armor is not the savior some think it is.
"You can have all the armor in the world on a tank and a tank can (still) be blown up," he said.
Can't say that's the most comforting answer.
From the Associated Press : City residents will vote next year on a proposed weapons ban that would deny handguns to everyone except law enforcement officers, members of the military and security guards.
If passed next November, residents would have 90 days to give up firearms they keep in their homes or businesses.
The proposal was immediately dismissed as illegal by a gun owners group.
Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else "actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment," according to the measure.
Gun Owners of California, a Sacramento-based lobbying group, quickly called the ban illegal.
Sam Paredes, the group's executive director, said state law bars local governments from usurping the state's authority to regulate firearms.
"The amazing thing is they are going to turn San Francisco into ground zero for every criminal who wants to profit at their chosen profession," Paredes said.
Washington, D.C., is the only major American city that currently bans handgun possession by private citizens.
Andrew Arulanandam, director of public affairs for the National Rifle Association, said San Francisco would be remiss to use that city as a model.
"If gun control worked, Washington, D.C., would be the beacon.
However, it's the murder capital of the United States," he said.
If approved, the weapons ban would take effect in January 2006.
Quote of the day: "Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment."
So preserving property or life within the scope of self-defense and protection of the home is not allowed.
No thanks.
If the people vote for this measure it will be hard to sympathize with them when robbery and rape rates skyrocket, because burgulars will know homes are not guarded, and rapists will know the only thing stopping them from the victim they desire is their own inhibitions.
From the Associated Press : A baby girl who had been cut out of her mother's womb was found after a frantic search, and authorities arrested the woman they say strangled the mother and stole the child.
The baby was in good condition Saturday.
Lisa M. Montgomery, 36, of Melvern, Kan., was arrested later Friday and charged with kidnapping resulting in death.
Bobbie Jo Stinnett, 23, was found Thursday in a pool of blood inside her small white home in Skidmore, a town in northwest Missouri.
Stinnett, who was eight months pregnant, had earlier been talking with her mother on the phone, and hung up saying a woman she had chatted with online had just arrived at her door, authorities said.
U.S. Attorney Todd Graves said Montgomery contacted Stinnett through an online message board, and authorities zeroed in on her using computer forensics.
Montgomery was seeking to buy a dog from Stinnett, who raised rat terriers, he said.
According to the criminal complaint, Montgomery traveled about 40 miles to Topeka, Kan., on Thursday to go shopping.
Her husband received a call from her saying she had gone into labor and given birth.
The next day, authorities say, Montgomery confessed that she strangled Stinnett from behind, cut her open, removed the baby and cut her umbilical cord.
I don't understand how we can call this fetus-thing that was ripped from a mother's womb a "child" or "girl" in a society that sanctions partial-birth abortion.
If you can't charge someone for killing a fetus via abortion during the eighth month, then surely you can't make a big deal about a woman who kidnapped a fetus that survived the knifing.
On a less-sarcastic note, I pray for the family of the 23-year-old woman.
No one should have to die because some crazy nut wanted a child and decided to kill for it.
If there's any good news in this story, it's that Victoria Jo will live on and carry her mother's memory.
Question for the pro-choicers: Being that it isn't yet the ninth month, can we still charge the killer with kidnapping?
Feminists have a reason to celebrate today as an appeals court just threw out the convictions of their martyr, Andrea Yates, by ruling that one of the prosecutor's expert witnesses gave false testimony at her trial.
Yates, in case you have forgotten, is the women from Texas who heinously drowned her five kids, aged 6 months to 7 years, one by one, in her bathtub.
Liberal feminist organizations rushed to Yates' defense, most notably the National Organization for Women, which provided money for her defense fund and held candlelight vigils.
No such ceremonies were held for her five dead children.
In 2002 a jury sentenced Yates to life in prison for the deaths of three of her children.
She was not tried in the deaths of the other two.
Today the 1st Court of Appeals overturned the convictions and ordered a new trial.
We can only hope for the same verdict.
The blood red nation of China is trying to curb the effects of a devastating 20-year-old policy that outlawed women from having more than one child.
As a result, only about 100 girls are born for every 119 boys, because couples traditionally favor males.
Beijing has set a goal of reversing the imbalance by 2010, and to do this they will outlaw the selective abortion of female fetuses to correct an imbalance in the ratio of boys to girls.
So now by killing the males they can hopefully narrow the gender gap.
What a country!
From Reuters : Sex-selective abortion is already banned but technologies such as ultrasound have made it easier to know a baby's gender in advance, increasing the chances for aborting girls.
Despite a desire to curb the sex imbalance and a relaxation in recent years that allows rural families to have two children if the first is a girl, China has shown no sign of abandoning the one-child policy and cracks down on those who advocate against it.
One such activist is Mao Hengfeng, who was dismissed in 1988 from her job at a Shanghai soap factory after becoming pregnant a second time.
Last April, the Shanghai public security bureau sentenced her to 18 months in a labor camp for campaigning against the one-child policy.
In other news: feminists still believe they're second-class citizens in the United States.
A CNN poll asks readers to rate the president's State of the Union speech last night.
After 90,000 votes Mr. Bush has a 'C-C+' grade across the board, meaning 45,000 Republicans gave him an 'A' and 45,000 liberals failed him.
But a new CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll suggests more people side with the president.
70 percent of respondents said Bush's policies on health care were positive, while 66 percent approved of the president's plan for Social Security.
78 percent said U.S. policy in Iraq is hading in the right direction, a 12 percentage point increase over pre-speech polling.
Overall, 77 percent of respondents said Bush is taking the country in the right direction after the speech compared to 67 percent beforehand.
And who wasn't moved by the embrace of mother of a soldier killed in Iraq and the daughter of a man killed by Saddam Hussein's regime?
It was a beautiful moment last night that resulted in the longest standing ovation of the evening.
Today the parents of Marine Corps Sgt. Byron Norwood said the Iraqi woman, Safia Taleb al-Suhail, had turned and introduced herself just before the speech.
"She thanked us for our son's sacrifice and made sure we knew the people in Iraq were grateful for the sacrifices that were made not just by our son, but by all of them," Janet Norwood said.
It was an uplifting moment suggesting that maybe we're doing the right thing.
I talked to a friend currently serving in Iraq last night and he says morale is up and the presence of troops is a positive thing.
They just can't pack up and leave.
Not just yet.
We must be patient.
We've all lived next to some pretty undesirable people at one point or another, but I can't imagine anyone being worse than this.
A Colorado judge ordered two teen-age girls to pay about $900 for the distress a neighbor said they caused by giving her home-made cookies adorned with paper hearts.
The pair were ordered to pay $871.70 plus $39 in court costs after neighbor Wanita Renea Young, 49, filed a lawsuit complaining that the unsolicited cookies, left at her house after the girls knocked on her door, had triggered an anxiety attack that sent her to the hospital the next day.
Taylor Ostergaard, then 17, and Lindsey Jo Zellitte, 18, paid the judgment on Thursday after a small claims court ruling by La Plata County Court Judge Doug Walker, a court clerk said on Friday.
The girls baked cookies as a surprise for several of their rural Colorado neighbors on July 31 and dropped off small batches on their porches, accompanied by red or pink paper hearts and the message: "Have a great night."
The Denver Post newspaper reported on Friday that the girls had decided to stay home and bake the cookies rather than go to a dance where there might be cursing and drinking.
Zebra Report has a picture of the good-intentioned girls.
Maybe delinquency does pay off better.
From the Associated Press : A lone gunman opened fire with an assault rifle Sunday inside a crowded mall in upstate New York, wounding one person before running out of ammunition and being subdued by employees, authorities said.
The gunman began shooting inside the Hudson Valley Mall shortly after 3 p.m. in Kingston, nearly 90 miles north of New York City.
The 24-year-old gunman went into a Best Buy store and started firing.
When he ran out of ammunition, he was captured by mall employees, police said.
Ulster Town Supervisor Fred Wadnola identified the gunman's weapon as an AK-47 assault rifle.
"Everyone was running and screaming.
Then I heard the shots," witness Heather Craig told Fox News.
Whoa!
You're telling me someone was able to take an AK-47 "assault rifle" into a mall and injure people?!
But it's New York.
They have gun laws!
And because New York has such strict gun laws - meaning citizens are prohibited from concealing weapons - a gunner can use bag-toting shoppers as target practice because guns laws keep mall shoppers at his mercy.
Had an armed civilian been inside the mall, perhaps he could have intervened before the suspect began injuring people before he ran out of ammo.
But not in New York.
Because there people like me who have never had so much as a traffic ticket in life cannot conceal weapons, unlike in Florida, where you walk past us everyday without even knowing it.
From the St. Pete Times : Some Florida legislators want to give people the right to shoot an attacker in a public place.
A House committee voted Wednesday to allow people to shoot to kill in self-defense if they are attacked "in any other place where he or she has a right to be."
Sponsored by Rep. Dennis Baxley, an Ocala Republican, the bill (HB 249) passed 13-0.
State law defines deadly force as that which is likely to cause "death or great bodily harm," such as firing a gun at a person or a vehicle.
Florida courts consider deadly force a last resort and have held that a person being attacked has the "duty to use every reasonable means to avoid the danger, including retreat, prior to using deadly force."
But this legislation says a person who is under attack in a public place "has no duty to retreat."
"Law-abiding people should not be told that if they are attacked, they should turn around and run," NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer told lawmakers.
"This bill gives back rights that have been eroded and taken away by a judicial system that at times appears to give preferential treatment to criminals."
Baxley held up a stack of more than 800 e-mails from Floridians who he said have written him to support the bill.
He said 62 House members, a majority, have endorsed his bill, and supporters include Attorney General Charlie Crist and groups representing Florida sheriffs, police chiefs and police officers.
Rep. Jeff Kottkamp, R-Cape Coral, said the bill reminded him of a sign he saw on a constituent's house while campaigning door-to-door.
Kottkamp said the sign, next to a doorbell, showed a smoking .44-Magnum handgun and the words: "We don't dial 911."
This is great news for Florida gun carriers because now to defend yourself you don't have to first make sure a "duty to retreat" is impossible.
Currently, if one's life is threatened he/she must make sure it is impossible to escape before using deadly force on an attacker.
Slobodan Milosevic's wife will go on trial next week on charges of mismanaging state property during the former president's rule, a court said Thursday.
Mirjana Markovic, the power behind the scenes during Milosevic's 13-year reign, is accused of illegally providing their grandson's nanny with a state-owned luxury apartment in Belgrade in 2000.
The Belgrade district court said that Markovic will be tried along with 10 other Milosevic-era officials who face similar charges of ``inappropriate use of state property'' that carry a sentence of up to five years in jail.
The trial will start on March 13, the court said.
Milosevic and his wife wielded enormous power in Yugoslavia for more than a decade before he was swept out of power after a popular revolt in October 2000.
The post-Milosevic government later extradited him to the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague, the Netherlands.
Since then, many of Milosevic's political and business allies as well as his two children have been accused of crimes.
Markovic, the leader of the neo-communist Yugoslav Left party, lost her parliamentary immunity from prosecution after she failed to become a deputy in the parliament of Serbia and Montenegro, the country that last month succeeded Yugoslavia.
The charismatic leader of Turkey's governing party was named prime minister Tuesday, a step that probably boosts chances that the United States will get permission to deploy troops in the country along Iraq's northern border.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who favors the deployment, hinted that he will reshuffle the Cabinet, but gave no indication if he would purge officials who opposed letting in the troops as analysts have suggested he might do.
Erdogan is extremely popular in Turkey and is likely be one of the few leaders with enough clout to unite his party and gain public support for allowing in the U.S. troops.
Turks overwhelmingly oppose a war -- by 94 percent, according to some polls.
Earlier this month, the Turkish parliament shocked the United States by rejecting the deployment by just four votes.
Erdogan has hinted that he will resubmit the resolution for approval, which could take another week.
The United States is pressing Turkey to act quickly.
Ships carrying equipment for U.S. troops are already waiting off the Turkish coast.
In Washington, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Richard Myers told a Pentagon news conference Tuesday that the United States would ``have a northern option whether or not Turkey fully supports all our requests.
``I'm not going to talk about the operational ways of doing it, but just be assured there will be a northern option,'' he said.
Also in Washington, Turkish Ambassador Farouk Logoglu told The Associated Press that the U.S. and Turkish militaries were holding informal discussions on the use of Turkish airspace.
The troop-basing resolution would allow the United States to use Turkish airspace.
If the resolution is not passed, Washington would likely want to use the airspace for strikes against Iraq and for airlifting troops to northern Iraq.
Refusing access to the troop deployment would mean Turkey would lose a US$15 billion U.S. aid package that Washington has offered to help cushion the country's economy if there is war.
It would also threaten Turkey's possible role in the future of Iraq.
Turkey, which fears northern Iraqi Kurds may declare independence in the aftermath of a war, has been pressing for a say if Saddam Hussein is ousted.
Secession by Iraqi Kurds could inspire Turkey's rebel Kurds, who for 15 years have been fighting for autonomy.
After he was elected, Erdogan said Turkey wanted assurances from the United States on its role in Iraq.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Tuesday there had been talks that Turkish troops could be deployed ``a short distance from their border to try to avoid refugee infiltration.''
Iraqi Kurds fear that Turkish troops could move deep into the autonomous enclave in northern Iraq and have threatened clashes.
Rumsfeld also said that like Turkey, the United States doesn't want to see a breakaway state: ``Our interest, needless to say, is to see that Iraq remains a single country,'' he said at the Pentagon news conference.
Prime Minister Abdullah Gul resigned earlier Tuesday to make way for Erdogan, who won a parliamentary seat in by-elections Sunday.
Gul will remain as a caretaker prime minister until President Ahmet Necdet Sezer approves Erdogan's Cabinet, a move that could happen as early as Wednesday.
Erdogan said he would submit his Cabinet list to the president ``as soon as possible,'' and leaders of Erdogan's Justice and Development Party met Tuesday evening.
When asked about possible changes in the Cabinet, Erdogan said: ``Perhaps there will be a small amount of change, a certain number of revisions.''
Gul's resignation had been long expected.
Erdogan heads the party but was constitutionally barred from running in November elections because he was jailed in 1999 for anti-secular activities.
The Justice party changed the constitution after taking power in the elections.
Erdogan, a leader of Turkey's pro-Islamic movement when he was jailed, said he moderated his policies in prison.
His party considers itself conservative and no longer uses the word 'Islamic' in its literature.
He now also advocates letting in U.S. troops for a war against Iraq even though it is a fellow Muslim state.
Unlike the soft-spoken Gul, Erdogan has a reputation as a fighter.
``Erdogan will be willing to engage in a bruising confrontation in a way that Gul was not willing to,'' said Bulent Aliriza, an analyst at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.
``If Erdogan decides that for his own reasons, and not U.S. pressure, he wants this, he will push it through.''
Tensions over the basing agreement spilled over into parliament Tuesday when opposition deputy Ufuk Ozkan shouted ``You are all American lackeys!'' at members of Erdogan's party, the Anatolia news agency reported.
A furious Justice party member, Fehmi Husrev Kutlu, rushed toward Ozkan, bumping into him and sending his eyeglasses flying, Anatolia reported.
Other legislators surrounded the two to head off a brawl.
U.S. and British troops were moving on the strategic southern port city of Basra Saturday after a massive aerial assault pounded Baghdad at dawn.
Thousands of beleaguered Iraqi soldiers in the south surrendered in the face of the major push.
The battle for Basra, an oil hub of some 1.3 million people, was underway by midday, with coalition troops trying to surround Iraqi positions and force a surrender.
U.S. aircraft bombed Iraqi tanks holding bridges close to the city.
Iraqi forces responded with artillery fire.
Earlier Saturday, Baghdad was again targeted, one day after a massive U.S. aerial bombardment in which more than 300 Tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on the capital.
The nine-story Security Headquarters in the Iraqi capital took a direct hit, strewing bricks, masonry and glass across the street in the al-Salhiya neighborhood of central Baghdad.
As coalition troops advanced, an entire Iraqi army division gave itself up, U.S. military officials said.
The division -- the 51st Infantry Division, with 8,000 men and as many as 200 tanks, a key unit in the defense of Basra -- was the largest defection in a day when Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's forces showed signs of crumbling.
Allied successes were marred by the collision of two Royal Navy helicopters over the Persian Gulf in which all six British crew members and one American were killed.
Saturday morning, American Marines and British troops rumbled along the main road from the Kuwaiti border to Basra, Highway 80, nicknamed the ``Highway of Death'' during the 1991 Gulf War, when U.S. airstrikes wiped out an Iraqi military convoy along it.
American units advancing west of Basra have already secured the Rumeila oil field, whose daily output of 1.3 million barrels makes it Iraq's most productive.
Until Basra, U.S. and British troops had encountered little resistance, even when they seized nearby Umm Qasr, and moved to secure key oil fields.
Iraqis mostly fought back with small arms, pistols, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
Regular Iraqi forces had withdrawn from Basra but elements of Saddam's security forces are continuing to resist, British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon said Saturday.
Other units moved into airfield complexes in western Iraq believed to have Scud missiles capable of reaching Israel, and possibly weapons of mass destruction.
Early Saturday, more units were waiting in Kuwait to smash through any Iraqi resistance.
Hundreds of tanks, armored personnel carriers, Humvees and trucks were lined up in parallel columns waiting in single-file to cross the Iraqi-Kuwait border.
By early next week, U.S. ground forces led by the Army's 3rd Infantry Division are likely to be at the outskirts of Baghdad, where they could face greater danger from the Republican Guard, some commanders said.
After weeks of delay, Turkey relented and agreed to let combat aircraft fly over its territory.
At the same time, however, Turkey sent 1,000 troops into northern Iraq, and the government said it would send more to prevent Iraqi Kurds from creating an independent state.
The United States strongly opposes any unilateral move by Turkey into northern Iraq.
A Turkish military spokesman on Saturday denied Turkish troops had crossed into Iraq.
The United States and Britain suffered their first casualties Thursday and Friday as they pushed into Iraq, with two U.S. Marines killed in combat and another eight British and four American Marines dying in a helicopter crash that appeared to be accidental.
There was no clear figure of Iraqi casualties.
Australian commandos, who have been operating deep in Iraq, destroyed a command and control post and killed a number of soldiers, according to the country's defense chief, Gen. Peter Cosgrove.
In an address Saturday, Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf told Iraqis that fighting had been ``fierce.''
He said most of those captured by allied forces were civilians, not soldiers.
He claimed Iraqi troops had destroyed five tanks.
He said more than 200 Iraqis had been injured, including women, children and other civilians who were being treated at five hospitals in Baghdad.
Hoon said Saddam's regime was crumbling under the pressure of a huge air assault.
``As last night's dramatic television coverage showed, the lights stayed on in Baghdad, but the instruments of tyranny are collapsing,'' he said.
Iraqi Vice President Taha Yasin Ramadan, speaking on Iraqi Radio, was quoted by the British Broadcasting Corp.'s monitoring service as accusing Britain and the United States of working to ``eliminate'' the state of Iraq.
In a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Ramadan said, ``It is also regrettable and deplorable that the (U.N.) General Secretariat has not issued any statement or reaction that condemns or deplores this aggression.''
Despite the heavy bombing, which the U.S. Central Command said targeted military command and control installations, the Iraqi regime gave no sign of quitting.
Bombers have also hit targets in the northern cities of Mosul, Kirkuk and Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
The Iraqi government released a video of Saddam, in uniform, meeting with his son Qusai, the commander of the Republican Guard, and the defense minister, Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmad.
It was unclear when the video was made.
U.S. intelligence officials said the Iraqi command and control system was in disarray, and U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said, ``The regime is starting to lose control of their country.''
Kurdish militiamen and U.S. special operations troops linked up with more than 1,000 U.S. Army paratroopers Thursday to secure the area around a strategic air strip, as the first large coalition ground force in northern Iraq began opening another front against Saddam Hussein's regime.
The Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade , including elite Army Rangers, jumped out of low-flying C-17 transport planes under cover of darkness Wednesday and secured a snow-dusted airfield, which will be used to bring in supplies and support personnel.
The airdrop -- one of the biggest paratroop drops in decades -- was a dramatic entry for ground troops into a region where only small groups of U.S. special forces have been operating.
Coalition airstrikes have been hitting Iraqi military forces and other strategic targets in the north.
``This tightens the noose against Saddam's forces battling coalition forces to the south,'' Brig. Gen. James Parker, commander of U.S. forces in the north.
``And it may also serve as a warning to Turkish forces.''
Giving cover for the deployment, U.S. warplanes struck Iraqi ground troops and bunkers in northern Iraq.
Three waves of combat planes from the aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt hit ``ground troops, command and control bunkers, artillery positions and ... a surface to air missile battery,'' said Lt. John Oliveira, the ship's public affair officer.
Around dawn Thursday, strikes resumed, with a massive explosion just outside the Kurdish zone close to the village of Kalak.
Warplanes pounded forward Iraqi positions in the hills overlooking Chamchamal, 35 kilometers (22 miles) east of the key oil city of Kirkuk.
Later Thursday, Kurdish troops in Chamchamal advanced their positions between government-controlled and rebel-controlled areas, taking over a Iraqi check point on their front with no fighting at this point, witnesses said.
Early Thursday, Kurdish fighters closed off a highway and roads near the airstrip where troops were said to be arriving, outside the town of Bashur, about 30 miles (50 kilometers) northeast of the Kurd-controlled city of Irbil and 30 miles (50 kilometers) south of the Turkish border.
From the highway, dusted from a recent snow, a flashing light from the airstrip's control tower was visible in the distance, and three helicopters could be seen landing, flying with nearly all their lights extinguished.
Future airlifts into the area will include supplies and support personnel for the 173rd's fighters, defense officials said.
The airfield's 6,700-foot (2,042-meter) runway is long enough to land C-17s and other U.S. military cargo planes.
Lt. Col. Thomas Collins, a spokesman for the U.S. Army's Southern European Task Force, refused to say whether the paratroopers deployed directly from Italy into Iraq or had taken a different route.
The matter immediately sparked controversy in Italy, where there is a strong anti-war movement.
The country's parliament voted this month to allow U.S.-led coalition forces to use Italian air space and military bases -- but not for directs attacks on Iraq.
Pentagon officials have said for weeks they would have U.S. forces in northern Iraq to open another front against Saddam's forces.
The vast majority of the coalition ground troops in Iraq are moving toward Baghdad from the south after entering from Kuwait.
Pentagon officials had hoped to have the Army's 4th Infantry Division invade Iraq from the north, but Turkey balked at allowing up to 62,000 U.S. troops on its soil to prepare for that option.
The use of the 173rd shows the military has shifted to a smaller, lighter force.
Military officials say they would have liked to have secured key oil fields around the northern cities of Mosul and Kirkuk -- and perhaps the cities themselves -- by now.
Though no hostilities were expected during the deployment, the 173rd decided to parachute in rather then ferry troops in by plane so that a significant combat force could mass almost immediately to protect itself, officers said, according to a U.S. reporter traveling with the 173rd.
``Kirkuk is key.
The Iraqi's want it, the Kurds want it, the Turks want it and various other ethnic groups also want it,'' Maj. Mike Hastings said.
``What this drop means is that we can secure it until we are relieved by other forces.''
Besides Mosul and Kirkuk, another key target in northern Iraq is Tikrit, Saddam's hometown and the tribal center for most of his inner circle.
Most of the Adnan Division of the Republican Guard relocated from the Mosul area to the Tikrit area shortly before the war began.
Another key mission for the 173rd could be to keep order in northern Iraq, which is controlled by two semi-autonomous Kurdish factions but also includes several splinter groups and a base for the al-Qaida-linked Ansar al-Islam.
Turkey has said it may send more troops into northern Iraq to prevent refugees from moving north, while U.S. officials have said they advised Turkey against sending large additional forces into northern Iraq.
Former Danish international Stig Toefting dropped his appeal of an assault conviction and will serve a four-month jail sentence, Denmark's TV2 reported Monday.
Toefting was convicted in October 2002 of assaulting a pair of restaurant workers during a night out with national squad teammates in the capital, Copenhagen.
He was sentenced to four months in prison, but appealed.
The hearing was scheduled for April 10.
TV2, quoting Toefting's lawyer Anders Nemeth, reported that that 33-year-old midfielder was ready to serve his sentence immediately.
Neither Toefting or Nemeth were immediately available for comment.
Earlier this month, Toefting said English Premier League club Bolton let him go so he could prepare for the appeal.
It was unclear whether Toefting would return to Bolton after serving his sentence.
The club said it wasn't aware of Toefting's decision to drop his appeal.
Toefting transferred to Bolton in February 2002 from German club Hamburg.
Toefting has been convicted before.
In 1999 he was given a 20-day suspended sentence for assaulting a fan who berated him for playing with German club Duisburg.
The popular player -- known for his temperament and the words ``No Regret'' tattooed across his chest -- retired from Denmark's national team after it was knocked out in the second round of the 2002 World Cup.
Toefting joined the Danish squad in 1993 and has 41 caps.
U.S. soldiers moved to capture Baghdad's Saddam International Airport early Friday and fought running battles with Iraqi defenders along the city's southern fringes.
``A vise is closing on the regime,'' U.S. President George W. Bush said.
Some frontline units went on heightened alert against the threat of chemical weapons, ordered to wear rubber boots and suits despite temperatures that soared into the 90s.
There was fierce fighting in Kut, to the south of Baghdad, where desperate Iraqis armed with rifles charged tanks in a suicide raid.
``We mowed down'' the attackers, said Lt. Col. B.P. McCoy.
Despite declarations that more tough fighting lies ahead, the top U.S. military official indicated there may not be an all-out battle for Baghdad.
Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, suggested isolating members of the old regime in the capital -- cut off from the rest of the country -- while an ``interim administration'' is put in place to begin work on a postwar government.
A meeting to organize an interim government could be held in Iraq within a week, a senior Pentagon official said Thursday night.
For the first time in the war, large parts of Baghdad lost electricity.
The cause was not known.
Myers told reporters at a Pentagon briefing that Americans had not targeted the power grid.
Tracer rounds lit the night sky and artillery boomed near the airport a few kilometers (miles) from the heart of President Saddam Hussein's capital of 5 million people.
At one stage, it appeared that U.S. forces had taken control of the airport, ``and then it got more confusing with continued fighting, Myers said Thursday night.
Capture of the airport would give American and British troops a facility for airlifting equipment and troops to Baghdad.
Along the city's southern edge, U.S. tanks and Bradley vehicles destroyed at least seven Iraqi armored personnel carriers and more than 15 Iraqi tanks in fighting that went on for more than four hours.
Two weeks into the war, American commanders reported a string of successes -- on the battlefield and within an Iraqi population initially reluctant about embracing invading troops.
Kurdish fighters in the north chipped in, when a top leader suggested they may agree not to seek control of the northern city of Kirkuk.
There were battlefield setbacks, as well.
Two Marines were killed and one injured in the close-quarters fighting in Kut.
And an Army soldier investigating a destroyed tank in central Iraq was killed by friendly fire when he was mistaken for an Iraqi, the military said.
U.S. defense officials also were investigating whether a Navy Hornet jet that crashed Wednesday was shot down by a U.S. Patriot missile.
The Navy was searching for the pilot Thursday.
The overall toll of American troops dead passed 50, and Bush visited a Marine camp, which has lost 13 -- more than any other installation.
``He's in heaven,'' the commander in chief told the family of one fallen Marine in a private moment.
To the cheers of thousands earlier in a speech, he vowed victory, and said, ``A vise is closing on the regime.''
Iraqi officials issued the latest in a series of exhortations in Saddam's name.
``Fight them with your hands.
God will disgrace them,'' they said, referring to invading American and British troops.
But the daily urgings seemed increasingly at odds with the military situation across the country, and Myers said Saddam had lost control of 45 percent of Iraq's territory.
As conventional units fought their way to the outskirts of the capital, officials said special forces had raided the Tharthar presidential palace near Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
Documents were seized at the site north of Baghdad, said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks at U.S. Central Command in the Persian Gulf, but no ranking members of the regime were found.
``That's all right, he added, ``there's other operations ongoing.''
To the far north, U.S. special forces and Kurdish militiamen captured the town of Bardarash and a nearby bridge, one of few routes into the city of Mosul near government-held oil fields.
Iraqis had held the town for 13 years.
In the country's southern region, British forces penetrated closer to the center of Basra, and warplanes dropped 500-pound (225-kilogram) and 1,000-pound (450-kilogram) laser-guided bombs on an Iraqi intelligence complex.
Die-hard defenders have held out for days inside the city of 1.3 million.
American officials cited continuing examples of Iraqis cooperating with invading troops.
In Najaf, they said a prominent cleric under house arrest by the Iraqi government had urged the population not to interfere with the operations of American or British forces.
A small group of Iraqi defenders has been holding out inside the city in a mosque, considered a Shiite holy site, and local clerics said one religious leader had recently arrived in hopes of arranging for their safe passage out of the shrine.
Ground forces closed in on Baghdad from separate southern approaches, the Army from the southeast and Marines from the southwest, in advances begun Tuesday night.
American and British helicopters and planes bombed positions in Kut, and Marines and Iraqis lobbed grenades at close quarters.
Between 10 and 15 Iraqis armed only with rifles charged Marine tanks in the suicide charge.
Two U.S. Marines died in the fighting -- and a medic who tried to save one of them sorrowfully buried his resuscitation equipment on the spot.
Army forces rolled past dozens of dead Iraqi soldiers and bombed-out hulks of Iraqi military equipment as they made their way toward Baghdad from the area around Karbala.
Many more Iraqi soldiers surrendered to the overwhelming force of the Americans, and were shuttled to the rear.
At the same time they worried about chemical weapons attacks, Brooks disclosed that a special operations force in the southwestern desert had found a number of bottles ``marked in strange ways.''
He said an investigation was under way.
Toyota Motor Corp. said Tuesday it will promote Akio Toyoda, a grandson of the company's founder who is widely viewed as a candidate to some day head Japan's largest automaker.
Managing director Toyoda, 46, grandson of Kiichiro Toyoda and the eldest son of Toyota honorary chairman Shoichiro Toyoda, will become one of 14 senior managing directors under a streamlined management system set to be introduced after a shareholders' meeting in June, the company said in a statement.
Toyoda, who joined Toyota, based in Toyota city, central Japan, in 1984, spearheaded the automaker's Internet and telematics business -- a technology that puts wireless communications into vehicles.
Considered a candidate for future Toyota president, Toyoda oversees its China business, a critical market for the automaker.
Toyoda has been on the star track for years.
When he joined the board in 2000, he was its youngest member.
Under a reform led by President Fujio Cho, the membership of Toyota's board of directors will be slashed to 27 from 58.
Executive vice presidents will be reduced to seven from nine.
The new system is designed to ``speed up decision-making and operations,'' Toyota spokesman Shigeru Hayakawa said.
Toyota's top posts held by Cho and Chairman Hiroshi Okuda remain unchanged.
Kiichiro Toyoda founded the automaker in 1937, transforming the loom manufacturer started by his father into an automaker.
U.S. forces tightened their grip throughout Baghdad, entering the city for the first time from the north, seizing a military airport and battling snipers and Republican Guard fighters.
Meanwhile, the U.S. military faced sharp criticism over assaults that killed three foreign journalists.
Pentagon officials said Tuesday they didn't know whether Iraqi President Saddam Hussein died in the U.S. airstrike on a Baghdad neighborhood the day before.
The strike destroyed three nearby houses and killed at least two people.
U.S. Marines battled snipers as they fought deeper into the capital from the east.
They seized the Rasheed Airport and captured enough ammunition for an estimated 3,000 troops.
Ominously, they also took a prison where they found U.S. Army uniforms and chemical weapons suits possibly belonging to American POWs.
Some army units routed Iraqi fighters from a Republican Guard headquarters inside the capital.
Others discovered a 12-room complex inside a cave, complete with white marble floors and fluorescent lighting.
Members of the U.S. Army's V Corps opened up a new front by entering Baghdad from the north.
The toll on Iraqi civilians four days after Americans first penetrated the Baghdad outskirts is unknown.
But the World Health Organization said Baghdad's hospitals were running out of supplies to treat the burns, shrapnel wounds and spinal injuries caused by the fighting.
Iraqi officials, however, remained defiant, saying Iraq's forces would never surrender to American forces: ``They will be burnt,'' said Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf.
In central Baghdad, a Reuters cameraman and a cameraman for Spain's Telecinco died when an American tank fired on the Palestine Hotel.
``The incident ... raises questions about the judgment of the advancing U.S. troops who have known all along that this hotel is the main base for almost all foreign journalists in Baghdad,'' Reuters Editor-in-Chief Geert Linnebank said.
Tareq Ayyoub, a journalist with Al-Jazeera, died when a U.S. warplane bombed the Arab-language satellite television's office.
An Abu Dhabi TV office in Baghdad also was hit.
Al-Jazeera categorically denied that its Baghdad bureau had been used by Iraqi forces to fire on U.S. troops.
U.S. Central Command said it fired on the TV office and the hotel after U.S. forces came under ``significant'' fire from those buildings.
Associated Press photographer Jerome Delay said he watched from the top floor of the hotel as American tanks took up positions on the bridge.
``All the shooting was concentrated on the bridge and across the river,'' where U.S. forces were located, he said.
It was not clear whether any Iraqi leader had been killed in the airstrike targeting Saddam in an upscale Baghdad neighborhood.
Iraqi rescue workers pulled two bodies from the rubble but said the toll could be as high as 14.
``I don't know whether he survived,'' U.S President George W. Bush said of Saddam at a joint news conference with British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
``The only thing I know is that he's losing power.''
Iraq's U.N. ambassador, Mohammed Al-Douri, said Tuesday he believes that Saddam is alive, although al-Douri acknowledged he has not communicated with Baghdad.
Bush and Blair sought to minimize their differences over who should govern and rebuild Iraq.
Blair favors a stronger U.N. role than Bush.
``There will be a vital role for the U.N. in the reconstruction of Iraq,'' Blair said.
``But the key is that Iraq in the end will be run by the Iraqi people.''
In northern Iraq, Kurdish forces tightened their ring around Kirkuk on Tuesday, following heavy coalition airstrikes on Iraqi fronts.
Kurdish militia took control of Sekamian plateau, about 10 kilometers (six miles) north of Kirkuk, Kurdish media reported.
The area affords a commanding view of the city and the vast oil fields of Iraq's No. 2 oil region.
The U.S. military said two planes had been lost.
An A-10 ``Warthog'' warplane was shot down near Baghdad, believed to be the first fixed-wing aircraft downed by an Iraqi surface-to-air missile since the war began.
U.S. Central Command said the pilot ejected, was recovered by ground forces and was in good condition.
A U.S. F-15E jet fighter also went down early Monday and a search was under way for its two-man crew, the military announced Tuesday.
Officials did not say whether the plane was shot down or crashed accidentally.
British forces in southern Iraq worked to restore order in the heavily looted streets of Basra, as desperate citizens swarmed water tanker trucks the day after British soldiers claimed Iraq's second largest city.
British forces also began establishing the country's first postwar administration Tuesday, granting a local sheik power to set up an administrative committee representing the groups in the region.
Iraq's U.N. Ambassador Mohammed Al-Douri, the first Iraqi official to concede defeat in the U.S.-led war, met privately with Secretary-General Kofi Annan, but refused to talk about rumors that he was planning to leave New York.
``I am sorry,'' he said.
``No Answer.''
``No comment at all.
This is my last word to you,'' he told hordes of journalists who chased him Thursday at his New York residence and U.N. headquarters seeking comment on his talks with the secretary-general, his future and the war.
Asked who should govern Iraq, Al-Douri said: ``I have nothing to do with that.''
Annan also declined to comment on Thursday's meeting with Al-Douri.
With the fall of Baghdad Wednesday, Al-Douri declared ``the game is over'' and expressed hope that the Iraqi people will now be able to live in peace.
He said he had not been in touch with Baghdad.
Beside meeting with Annan, Al-Douri spent several hours during the late morning and afternoon meeting with ambassadors and diplomats in the Delegate's Lounge.
``I wished him good luck but I don't know what he said to the secretary-general and what will be his next steps,'' said Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa, who talked with Al-Douri before his own meeting with Annan.
In an interview with The Associated Press Wednesday night, Al-Douri said he will continue to work at the United Nations and had no intention of defecting.
``Defecting from who?'' he asked.
``I think the government has already defected.
There is no more Iraqi government to be defected from.''
Annan said early Thursday -- before meeting Al-Douri -- that in talks with the envoy Monday, ``he didn't ask for an asylum or protection ... (and) he didn't ask me for help with his status.''
``We did talk about what happens, depending on the evolution of things on the ground,'' Annan said.
The ambassador had vehemently defended his country for months as the United States and its allies sought U.N. backing for war on Iraq.
Privately, many U.N. diplomats see him as a respectable colleague.
``I sympathize with his need to create a new life for himself,'' said Britain's U.N. Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock.
Al-Douri taught international law at Baghdad University for over 30 years before becoming a diplomat in 1999, first at the United Nations in Geneva and since early 2001 at U.N. headquarters in New York.
He said in the AP interview he would love to return to teaching but for now he plans to remain at the United Nations.
``Things will be crystalized one day,'' he said.
``What I worried about is that things are settled in the country ... so in the future the Iraqi people will live in peace without sanctions, without wars, without suffering.
This is my message.''
Separately, lawyers who claim that Iraq helped plan the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing that killed 168 people asked a judge at a federal court in New York to force Al-Douri to testify in the case and hold the envoy in contempt, saying they worry that he would flee the country.
But U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said Al-Douri still has diplomatic immunity as Iraq's ambassador.
Under U.N. rules, a new Iraqi government would have to ask to represent the country, which the General Assembly would then consider.
``He is still Iraq's ambassador at the United Nations,'' White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said in Washington.
``Legally, that is the way it works at the U.N.''
Larry Klayman, chairman of Judicial Watch, which represent 14 survivors and victims' relatives who have filed a $1.5 billion federal lawsuit against Iraq in Washington, said his organization had served a subpoena on Al-Douri twice, on March 26 and March 28, but said he has not responded.
U.S. District Judge John S. Martin did not immediately rule but scheduled a hearing for next week.
The April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building was the deadliest terrorist strike on American soil at the time.
The suit claims Iraqi officials provided money and training to convicted bomber Timothy McVeigh and conspirator Terry Nichols.
McVeigh was executed in 2001, and Nichols is serving a life sentence.
The dictator Suharto has fallen, the constitution has changed, the media was unshackled, democratic elections held, and East Timor freed.
After Sept. 11, 2001, Indonesia was quick to sign onto U.S. President George W. Bush's global war on terror.
Yet, Washington maintains a 12-year ban on arms sales to the world's most populous Muslim nation with the aim of curbing human rights abuses still happening despite momentous political change.
Frustrated, Jakarta's generals are looking elsewhere to replace antiquated arsenals.
Later this month Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri travels to Moscow to seek the Kremlin's help in modernizing her increasingly obsolete 300,000-member armed forces.
She is also likely to open the way for Russian companies to vie for lucrative deals in the oil and gas sector, long dominated by American and British resource giants.
Although opposite ends of the Earth, Indonesia and Russia have some basic things in common.
Both are geographically sprawling with massive multiethnic populations.
Both are struggling to preserve national unity as they fight separatism and build democracy after the collapse of decades of authoritarian rule.
Both are resource-rich, but face huge economic problems made worse by endemic corruption.
And, currently, both have opposed the U.S.- led war on Iraq.
Indonesia's Foreign Ministry spokesman Marty Natalegawa says Megawati's meeting with Russian President Putin slated for April 21 will touch on the Iraq crisis.
But other diplomats say that issue will serve primarily to bring the two closer together on bottom-line issues such as trade and arms sales.
Analysts worry that Indonesia's military is now so degraded it can no longer control the borders of the far-flung archipelago, allowing for easy infiltration by extremists.
Last year's Bali bombings, which killed 202 people, illustrated the threat of terrorism in Indonesia.
And, broad opposition to the U.S.-led attack on Iraq threatens to lead to a backlash by militant Islamists.
``Nearly everybody in Indonesia sees this Iraq war as completely unnecessary and there is widespread public opposition to U.S. policies,'' said Jusuf Wanadi of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
Close ties between Moscow and Jakarta are not unprecedented.
Indonesia relied on Soviet military assistance in the 1950s under Megawati's father and founding President Sukarno, but these were severed after the anti-communist Gen. Suharto seized power in 1965.
The United States quickly became the Southeast Asian country's main weapons supplier, and annual arms sales peaked at US$400 million in the 1980s.
In 1991, however, the U.S. Congress banned this after Indonesian troops killed hundreds of civilians in East Timor.
In 1999, East Timor became free, but only after Indonesian forces laid waste to it as they withdrew after a pro-independence referendum.
The shocking level of destruction prompted U.S. lawmakers to expand the ban to cover almost all military ties with Indonesia.
Since then some in the Bush administration -- particularly Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, a former ambassador to Jakarta and a prime architect of the Iraq war -- have pushed for the ban to be repealed.
So far, U.S. lawmakers have reinstated only a limited officer training program.
But that's far from enough for Indonesia's generals.
``I think the Indonesian military has finally decided that restrictions and conditionalities from Washington are just not worth it,'' said Juwono Sudarsono, a former defense minister.
``So they want to look for alternative sources for planes, helicopters and other hardware.''
Moscow has already had some success in wooing Indonesia as a customer.
Jakarta has recently purchased some Russian weapons, including 10,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles, a squadron of naval Mil-2 helicopters and a dozen BTR-80A amphibious carriers for its marines.
Currently, Indonesia uses short-range Rapier missiles purchased 30 years ago to protect its vital oil and natural gas fields in Sumatra, Borneo and Papua from air attack.
``Replenishing them has been a big problem,'' Sudarsono said.
Air defense commanders want to augment the Rapiers with Russia's impressive long-range S-300 missiles, or shorter-range systems such as the SA-15 Gauntlet or shoulder-fired Igla.
The Air Force is reportedly considering purchasing several squadrons of Sukhoi Su-27 interceptors, considered the world's premier dogfighters.
Previously, Indonesian Air Force commanders preferred Western jets that were compatible with the U.S.-made F-16 fighter-bombers already in the Indonesian inventory.
But neighboring Malaysia's success in integrating Russian MiG-29s and American F/A-18 Hornets persuaded them otherwise, Sudarsono said.
If Megawati does stiff-arm the United States on the weapons issue, it is unlikely relations with Washington will be permanently damaged.
Whatever happens, Indonesia, a mainly Muslim but politically secular state, is natural ally in the struggle against terrorism and religious militancy.
What could be more worrying for Washington is Russia's economic ambitions.
Trade between Indonesia and Russia increased by dlrs 36.2 million to dlrs 203.5 million in 2001 -- the last year for which statistics are available.
Analysts say this can only grow.
The real concerns, though, are in the petroleum sector.
Megawati and Putin are expected to sign agreements to give Russian companies a toehold in Indonesia's oil and gas industry, long dominated by American and British giants such as Exxon Mobil and BP.
A U.S.-sponsored forum that brought Iraqi opposition leaders together to shape the country's postwar government began Tuesday with a U.S. promise not to rule Iraq and concluded with an agreement to meet again in 10 days.
Meeting in the biblical birthplace of the prophet Abraham, delegates from Iraq's many factions discussed the role of religion in the future government and ways to rebuild the country.
But some Shiite Muslim groups boycotted the meeting and thousands protested nearby.
A 13-point statement released after the meeting stressed the need to work toward a democratic Iraq built on the rule of law and equality.
It also called for dissolving Saddam's Baath Party but left open the question of separating church from the state.
Retired Lt. Gen. Jay Garner, who will head the U.S.-led interim administration in Iraq, opened the conference under a golden-colored tent in the shadows of the 4,000-year-old ziggurat at Ur, a terraced temple platform of the ancient Sumerians.
``What better birthday can a man have than to begin it not only where civilization began but where a free Iraq and a democratic Iraq will begin today?'' said Garner, who turned 65 Tuesday and wore a twin American and Iraqi flag pin on his blue shirt.
White House envoy Zalmay Khalilzad told delegates that the United States has ``no interest, absolutely no interest, in ruling Iraq.''
``We want you to establish your own democratic system based on Iraqi traditions and values,'' Khalilzad said.
``I urge you to take this opportunity to cooperate with each other.''
Participants included Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites from inside the country and others who spent years in exile.
U.S. officials invited the groups, which picked their own representatives.
Many Iraqis boycotted the meeting in opposition to U.S. plans to install Garner atop an interim administration.
Thousands of Shiites -- who constitute Iraq's most populous religious group but were repressed under Saddam Hussein -- demonstrated in nearby Nasiriyah, chanting ``No to America and no to Saddam!''
``Iraq needs an Iraqi interim government.
Anything other than this tramples the rights of the Iraqi people and will be a return to the era of colonization,'' said Abdul Aziz Hakim, a leader of the largest Iraqi Shiite group, the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
U.S. officials hope more Iraqis join the process and stressed that this was just the first of many such meetings in Iraq.
The meeting concluded with the delegates voting by show of hands to meet again in 10 days.
A national conference is planned to select the interim administration, perhaps within weeks, a senior U.S. official said on condition of anonymity.
The interim administration could begin handing power back to Iraqi officials within three to six months, but forming a government will take longer, said Maj. Gen. Tim Cross, the top British member of Garner's team.
``One has to go through the process of building from the bottom up, allowing the leadership to establish itself, and then the election process to go through and so forth,'' Cross said.
``That full electoral process may well take longer.''
Garner's Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance is charged with coordinating humanitarian assistance, rebuilding infrastructure shattered by years of war and U.N. sanctions, and gradually handing back power to Iraqis leading a democratically elected government.
Tuesday's meeting was the first step toward that goal after the ouster of Saddam.
Sheik Ayad Jamal Al Din, a Shiite religious leader from Nasiriyah, urged the delegates to craft a secular government, according to a pool report.
But Nassar Hussein Musawi, a schoolteacher, disagreed: ``Those who would like to separate religion from the state are simply dreaming,'' he said.
Iraqi exile Hatem Mukhliss quoted President John F. Kennedy's exhortation, ``Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country,'' and called on Iraqis to write a constitution, establish a legal system and consider what role the army should play.
He asked coalition representatives to address problems of security, electricity and water in Iraq and help rebuild destroyed and looted hospitals.
``Saddam reduced the country to such a state that it was necessary for people to sell off personal possessions,'' Mukhliss said.
``Now it's time to take our country back.''
There are already tensions between the United States and some Iraqi factions.
Kurdish groups appear unwilling to compromise on their demand to expand the border of their autonomous area to include the oil-rich city of Kirkuk and Kurdish parts of the city of Mosul.
That could pose a problem for the United States, because Turkey worries that Kurdish control of Kirkuk could lead to aspirations for independence and in turn encourage separatist Kurds in Turkey.
Iraqi opposition leaders fear the United States is trying to force Ahmed Chalabi, head of the London-based umbrella Iraqi National Congress, on them as leader of a new Iraqi administration.
Chalabi was the first top Iraqi opposition leader to be airlifted by the U.S. military into southern Iraq as the fighting wound down, and he and other top members of his group plan to meet soon in Baghdad.
U.S. officials said Chalabi was brought in because he offered forces to the coalition.
Neither Chalabi nor many other leaders of anti-Saddam groups attended Tuesday's meeting, but they sent delegates.
Iraqis protesting the conference said it did not represent their interests.
The protesters held banners written in English and Arabic saying the ``Hawza,'' or the Shiite religious seminary in Najaf, represents them.
Even some of those at the meeting said they did not want Garner leading the interim administration.
``We will press for any Iraqi civilian administration regardless of what the Americans say.
An administration by Garner is not acceptable,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an Iraqi physician and opposition activist.
He said American officials have outlined what Garner's administration would look like: Each ministry would be headed by an American, either military or civilian.
Each minister would have two American deputies and eight American advisers, plus four Iraqi advisers from inside the country and four Iraqi exiles.
Associated Press writer Patrick McDowell in Kuwait City contributed to this report.
The lawyer for a Russian military journalist convicted of treason filed an appeal Wednesday in an effort to overturn the guilty verdict against his client, who was released on parole earlier this year, news agencies reported.
Grigory Pasko's lawyer Genri Reznik filed the appeal with Russian Supreme Court, the Interfax and ITAR-Tass news agencies reported.
He asked the court to invalidate the verdict and throw out the criminal case against Pasko, they said.
Pasko was sentenced to four years in prison in December 2001 for illegally attending a meeting of top military commanders and taking notes there.
A military court said he intended to pass the notes to Japanese media with which he had worked.
Pasko, whose sentence included time served, was released in January for good behavior after serving more than two-thirds of the sentence.
He has maintained his innocence, saying the military was punishing him for exposing environmental abuses by the Russian navy, including the dumping of radioactive waste into the sea.
Reznik said an initial appeal he lodged the day Pasko was freed never reached the presidium of the Supreme Court, according to Interfax.
The lawyer said the court's military board had refused to launch proceedings on the appeal.
Reznik said he addressed the new appeal directly to Supreme Court Chairman Vyacheslav Lebedev and asked that it not be considered by military judges ``because the military justice system has adopted a biased attitude against Pasko,'' Interfax reported.
The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Europe and Eurasia said Tuesday that the U.S. government won't be involved in choosing subcontractors for American companies named to help rebuild Iraq.
``The way it works is that there have been an initial set of contracts let to US companies, since it's U.S. money.
Those companies can subcontract to any company they want,'' Elizabeth Jones said.
She made the statements after a meeting with the speaker of the Portuguese parliament, Joao Mota Amaral.
``The U.S. government has done what it is going to do: it has opened up the process to international companies.
We can't direct commerce,'' Jones said.
``Once it's a commercial proposition, then international bidding processes come into effect.''
Jones met with Defense Minister Paulo Portas on Tuesday and will meet Foreign Minister Antonio Martins da Cruz before leaving Portugal Wednesday.
About 50 Portuguese companies - mostly in the construction sector -- are applying for subcontracts to help rebuild Iraq, Portuguese media reported.
Many are hoping to reap benefits from Portuguese government support of the U.S.-led war to oust Saddam Hussein.
Also, Portugal hosted a last ditch pre-war summit in the Azores islands for leaders of the United States, Britain and Spain.
Rudolph Giuliani will wed his companion, Judith Nathan, on May 24 in the ex-mayor's old home, Gracie Mansion.
The news was announced Thursday by Giuliani spokeswoman Sunny Mindel.
His successor, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, will perform the ceremony.
Giuliani, 58, proposed to Nathan, a former nurse, during a November business trip to Paris -- five months after he finalized his divorce from Donna Hanover after 20 years of marriage.
In interviews last year, Giuliani said Nathan gave him ``tremendous emotional support'' through his treatment for prostate cancer and as he led the city during the aftermath of the Sept.
11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center.
``We were close already,'' Giuliani said.
``And then we went through hell together.''
Giuliani and Nathan began appearing in public together in May 2000.
Soon after, he announced that he and Hanover were moving toward legal separation.
During the legal proceedings leading up to the divorce, a judge ruled that Nathan could not visit Gracie Mansion, the official mayoral residence, as long as Giuliani's children lived there.
Giuliani and Hanover have two teenage children, Andrew and Caroline.
The divorce settlement called for Giuliani to pay Hanover more than $6.8 million.
Hanover, 53, is host of a syndicated television show, ``Famous Homes and Hideaways.''
Last month, she and her fiance -- an old high school sweetheart -- invited the press along as they went shopping for wedding bands, saying they are planning a wedding in the New York City area this summer.
Giuliani's first marriage to his second cousin, Regina Peruggi, lasted about 14 years.
It was annulled by the Catholic Church because the couple had not obtained a church dispensation required when second cousins marry.
Nathan divorced wallpaper salesman Bruce Nathan in 1992.
They have a teenage daughter.
The Giuliani-Nathan nuptials will be a first for Bloomberg, who is making an exception from his policy of not performing weddings, said Bloomberg spokesman Ed Skyler.
Giuliani regularly officiated at weddings while in office.
``The mayor is honored by their request,'' Skyler said.
The United States and Britain are preparing a resolution that would give the United Nations a role in humanitarian relief but not peacekeeping in Iraq, a senior official in U.S. President George W. Bush's administration said Friday.
Separately, the United States has decided to divide the military and humanitarian relief mission in Iraq into three parts under American, British and Polish command, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Six European countries have agreed to contribute troops to the British and Polish sectors to create an international stability force, the official said.
The draft resolution would limit the U.N. role to helping with refugees and displaced people, reconstruction and humanitarian assistance, the official said.
The United States and Britain agree on all but a few of the fine details of the resolution, the official said, though there is no timetable on when it would be introduced.
U.N. officials are already in Iraq providing humanitarian relief.
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan said this week that the body has no interest in policing a postwar Iraq, although it could contribute to the political resuscitation of the country.
``Take the question of security.
I don't think the U.N. would want to take on that,'' Annan said.
``There has been a suggestion that the U.N. wanted to take over the whole Iraq and run it, which was also not the case.''
What the United Nations could contribute beyond humanitarian assistance was ``political facilitation,'' Annan said.
The proposed draft resolution would probably face resistance from other U.N. Security Council members who have favored a U.N.-convened conference of the kind that helped establish Afghanistan's post-Taliban government.
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld discussed the resolution with Prime Minister Tony Blair and Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon on Friday as Rumsfeld returned from a tour of Iraq, Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf region.
Rumsfeld said afterward he hoped the U.N. would play a role but did not publicly discuss the draft resolution outlining that role.
Hoon, who joined Rumsfeld in a news conference at Heathrow airport, also did not mention the draft resolution.
``We are right to be optimistic about the way forward'' in Iraq, Hoon said.
International stability forces will be sent to Iraq as soon as possible, the U.S. official said, though it was unclear when that would be.
Those troops will work to restore and maintain order and supervise humanitarian projects such as the restoration of water and electricity and delivery of food and medical aid.
The six nations contributing troops are Italy, Spain, Ukraine, Denmark, the Netherlands and Bulgaria, the official said.
Representatives of those countries will meet with British officials May 7 and Polish officials May 22 to determine what forces each country will contribute and whether they will be put under British or Polish command.
The U.S. part of the stability force will be comprised of American troops.
While that portion is likely to consist of a military division -- about 20,000 -- the troop strength of the other two sectors has yet to be determined, the official said.
The international stabilization force would be under the U.S. war commander, Gen. Tommy Franks.
At least initially, the coalition stability forces will augment rather than replace the 135,000 American troops inside Iraq, the official said.
The stability forces will focus on providing security and humanitarian relief while other U.S. troops focus on rooting out leftover members of Saddam Hussein's government and other armed elements in Iraq.
Rumsfeld said, however, that the more troops other countries contribute to the stability effort, the fewer U.S. troops will be needed inside Iraq.
Planning for both the U.N. resolution and the international security force left out France, Germany and Russia, three U.S. allies that vehemently opposed the war in Iraq.
Some of the NATO members who agreed to send troops may want NATO authorization for that action, the official said.
Requests for such authorization will be routed through the alliance's defense planning committee, which does not include France, the official said.
The outlines for the international stability force were decided at a conference Hoon hosted Wednesday with representatives from 16 countries, mostly NATO members.
Other countries including the Philippines, South Korea, Qatar and Australia agreed to send other help such as field hospitals, engineers, explosive ordnance disposal teams or nuclear, biological and chemical weapons experts.
The U.S., British and Polish sectors will be drawn to take into account ethnic, religious, tribal and political factions within Iraq, the official said.
For example, although ethnic Kurds are the majority in large parts of northern Iraq, there are also large numbers of Kurds within Baghdad.
Some Arab countries also want to play a role in the stability operation in Iraq but are reluctant to send troops because of political, religious and ethnic considerations, the official said.
Countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council have offered to donate money for the effort.
Rumsfeld also met Friday with King Abdullah of Jordan, an American ally in the Middle East.
Defense officials say Jordan provided key help in the Iraq war, acting as a staging area for U.S. special operations raids into western Iraq to prevent missiles from being fired at Jordan or Israel.
Rumsfeld did not say what the two discussed.
Police intercepted 33 African immigrants who came ashore Thursday in southern Spain aboard an overcrowded boat, including several pregnant women and other travelers suffering from hypothermia, police said.
Spanish media showed dramatic photos of police struggling to carry women on the verge of fainting after they were found wandering through Tarifa, Spain's windswept southern tip, Civil Guard officials told Spanish news agencies.
Police also arrested two Moroccan men suspected of trafficking in human beings and navigating the Zodiac boat across from Africa, Efe said.
Twenty-six of the would-be immigrants were from sub-Saharan Africa, six of them women, and the other seven were males from North African countries, police said.
Red Cross officials administered first aid on the scene, and the detainees were taken to a processing center for the government to begin expulsion proceedings.
Tens of thousands of destitute Africans try to enter Spain illegally each year by crossing the perilous Strait of Gibraltar to reach the southern mainland or by sailing northwest to the Canary Islands out in the Atlantic.
They seek a better life doing menial jobs in Spain or hope to use the country as a stepping stone to other points in Europe.
Most are caught trying to sneak in and some die in the attempt.
North Korea's military may have fired a laser at a U.S. helicopter in March, a U.S. official said Tuesday, as the communist state ditched its last legal obligation to keep itself free of nuclear weapons.
The aircraft's censors detected the unknown type of laser while it was flying near the heavily fortified frontier that divides the two Koreas, the U.S. military official said on condition of anonymity.
No one was injured and no equipment was damaged in the incident.
North Korea said Tuesday that a 1992 agreement with South Korea not to deploy nuclear arms on the Korean Peninsula was nullified, accusing the United States of derailing the deal.
``The inter-Korean declaration on denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was thus reduced to a dead document due to the U.S. vicious hostile policy to stifle the DPRK with nukes,'' said the North's official news agency, KCNA.
DPRK stands for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the North's official name.
The announcement came as U.S. President George W. Bush and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun were about to meet Wednesday in Washington to discuss North Korea's nuclear programs.
The accord was the last remaining legal obligation under which North Korea was banned from developing atomic arms.
In January this year, North Korea withdrew from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a global accord to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
A U.S. military official in Seoul, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Tuesday North Korea is believed to have exported US$580 million worth of missiles to Iran, Pakistan, Libya, Syria, Egypt, Yemen and the United Arab Emirates in 2001.
In December, a shipment of North Korean missiles bound for Yemen was briefly stopped in the Arabian Sea.
North Korea accuses the United States of planning to attack the communist country, which Bush has branded part of an ``axis of evil'' along with Iran and Iraq.
It also revived its claim that the U.S. military keeps many nuclear weapons in South Korea, turning the country into ``the biggest nuclear advance base in the Far East.''
Washington says it wants to use dialogue to resolve the nuclear crisis, although U.S. officials have not ruled out a military option.
North Korea ``keenly felt that the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula would only remain as a daydream unless the U.S. drops its hostile policy toward the DPRK,'' KCNA said.
It said the U.S. invasion of Iraq taught it that ``a war can be averted and the sovereignty of the country and the security of the nation can be protected only when a country has ... a strong military deterrent force capable of decisively repelling any attack to be made by any types of sophisticated weapons.''
In New York, South Korean President Roh said he will never condone North Korea's nuclear development, but Seoul and Washington agree the nuclear standoff with the North must be solved peacefully ``by all means.''
``It is incumbent upon Pyongyang to give up its nuclear project and come forward as a responsible member of the international community,'' he said.
``When the North takes this route, the Republic of Korea and the international community will extend the necessary support and cooperation.''
Julianne Lee, a Roh spokeswoman, said the North Korean statement might be a negotiating ploy in the wake of talks last month with U.S. officials in Beijing.
During the talks in Beijing, U.S. officials said North Korea claimed it already possesses nuclear weapons, and that it had reprocessed 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods -- a move that could yield several atomic bombs within months.
North Korea offered to drop its nuclear and missile programs in exchange for security guarantees and economic aid, according to U.S. officials.
The nuclear crisis flared in October, when Washington said North Korea admitted having a secret nuclear program in violation of a 1994 treaty with Washington.
Australia will keep open its embassy in Saudi Arabia despite decisions by the United States, Britain and Germany to close their diplomatic outposts in the country amid growing terror fears.
On the eve of a visit to the Saudi capital, Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said security at the Australian embassy appeared to be sufficient.
``We have quite a substantial security presence at the Australian embassy in Riyadh and the ambassador thinks that that security presence is sufficient,'' Downer told the Australian Broadcasting Corp.
Australia is one of Washington's staunchest allies.
Canberra sent troops to fight in the war on terror in Afghanistan and alongside U.S. and British forces in Iraq.
New Zealand also has no immediate plans to close its Saudi embassy.
On Tuesday, Saudi security officials said three suspected al-Qaida militants were arrested in Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, in sweeps following the near-simultaneous suicide attacks on three residential compounds on the outskirts of Riyadh on May 12.
The bombings killed 34 people -- including nine attackers, eight Americans and two Britons -- and wounded nearly 200 others.
Earlier this week, Saudi and U.S. officials said they had new intelligence pointing to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida group possibly launching fresh attacks in the United States or against American interests overseas.
Israeli troops shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and critically injured two children, ages 7 and 9, during conflicts in the West Bank that erupted Tuesday as Israeli and Palestinian leaders moved toward talks on a new Mideast peace plan.
The shootings -- which the Israeli army said came in response to attacks by Palestinians throwing stones and molotov cocktails -- came a day after Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared that Israel's occupation in the West Bank must end, stunning both dovish opponents and hardline allies.
Sharon's remarks and Israel's conditional acceptance Sunday of the so-called ``road map'' to peace were expected to jump-start stalled Mideast peace negotiations.
A summit between Sharon and his Palestinian counterpart, Mahmoud Abbas, had been planned for Wednesday but was postponed, according to Israeli and Palestinian officials, who blamed each other for the delay.
The officials said no new date had been set; Israel Radio said the meeting would take place Thursday.
A three-way summit with U.S. President George W. Bush could take place as early as next week, possibly in Jordan.
Israeli soldiers shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and wounded a 7-year-old boy after opening fire at stone throwers in the Tulkarem refugee camp in the West Bank on Tuesday, Palestinian hospital officials said.
The army said troops fired, and hit a boy, after a Palestinian youth threw a molotov cocktail.
In a village near the West Bank city of Nablus on Tuesday, Israeli troops opened fire on youths throwing stones, hitting a 9-year-old Palestinian boy in the head and critically wounding him, and hitting two 12-year-old boys in the legs, lightly wounding them, Palestinian hospital officials said.
A 10-year-old boy was struck in the leg by a rubber bullet, but was not seriously hurt, the officials said.
Military sources said troops were trying to break up stone-throwing protests, but did not use live fire.
The army was not aware of any injuries.
Five Palestinian children, a Palestinian woman and a police officer, were injured Tuesday after accidentally detonating explosives in the West Bank city of Hebron, Palestinian security officials said.
The children found the explosives in two plastic bags under a tree and accidentally detonated the first bag.
After a police officer arrived, the second bag exploded, seriously injuring him, the officials said.
Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teenager Monday and another surrendered after infiltrating from Gaza, the military said.
They were unarmed and apparently looking for work.
In a village near the West Bank town of Qalqiliya, an 11-year-old Palestinian boy was killed during an exchange of gunfire.
Also Monday, Israeli soldiers fired on four diplomatic vehicles in the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, diplomats said.
There were no injuries from the incident.
Peter Lundberg, an official from the Swedish Consulate in Jerusalem, said that two bullets hit the windshield of the Swiss Consulate's armored car, and that small-arms fire also was directed at other cars from Sweden, Denmark and the European Union.
Military sources said the Israeli army had established roadblocks at the entrance to Beit Hanoun to prevent Palestinians militants from leaving the area.
The sources said shots had been fired in the air when vehicles tried to skirt the roadblocks.
The violence erupted after Sharon endured withering criticism Monday from members of his own Likud Party over his Cabinet's acceptance of the U.S.-backed ``road map'' peace plan.
Sharon indicated a 180-degree turnaround after decades of warning that an Israeli withdrawal from even small parts of the West Bank could endanger Israel's existence.
Skeptics, however, wondered whether Sharon's conversion was a shrewd effort to deflect U.S. pressure in the hopes the road map would fail before Israel had to make tough concessions.
``To keep 3.5 million people under occupation is bad for us and them,'' Sharon said in remarks broadcast on Israel Radio.
The term ``occupation'' is anathema to the Israeli right, which believes Israel has a legitimate claim to the West Bank and Gaza Strip for religious and security reasons.
Palestinians and their dovish Israeli allies routinely use the word ``occupation'' when demanding that Israel leave the West Bank and Gaza and dismantle Jewish settlements.
Palestinians claim all of the West Bank and Gaza for a state.
On Sunday, Sharon's Cabinet conditionally approved the ``road map,'' a three-phase plan that begins with a halt to violence and envisages a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 2005.
Sharon told party critics he was committed to finding a political solution to the conflict, including an Israeli withdrawal from West Bank population centers.
``This can't continue endlessly.
Do you want to remain forever in Ramallah, Jenin, Nablus?'' he asked.
Likud lawmakers charged that the road map was slanted in favor of the Palestinians and endangers Israel.
In his remarks Monday, Sharon left himself an out.
``What will happen if Palestinian terror continues?
Nothing.
Nothing will happen.
The Palestinians will get nothing,'' he said.
Critics have said Sharon's long-held condition that all violence must stop before peace moves is unrealistic and guarantees failure of any peace initiative, including the road map, thus releasing him from the necessity of following through on his remarks.
Liberal lawmaker Yossi Sarid argued Sharon was trying to keep his intentions murky to persuade the U.S. government that he was committed to the plan, while his hawkish allies could assume he was just making a tactical move to end U.S. pressure.
``Ariel Sharon likes to walk in the fog, because then no one knows where he is headed,'' Sarid wrote in the Yediot Ahronot daily.
A retired navy officer facing life in prison over a failed effort to protect Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan, told a court Thursday he felt remorse for his part in the 1999 plot.
``I have a guilty conscience,'' Andonis Naxakis said during his two-hour testimony.
Naxakis is one of 13 people on trial for bringing the fugitive guerrilla leader to Greece.
Ocalan was moved by the government to its embassy compound in Kenya, where he was captured by Turkish commandos.
The retired Greek officer said he had been trying to get Ocalan to The Netherlands, home to a large Kurdish community.
He claimed he had been manipulated by the government.
``I believe I was unwittingly used as bait for its disgraceful plan ... an organized move by the government to hand Ocalan over to Turkey,'' he said.
Naxakis and two of Ocalan's Kurdish associates are being tried on criminal charges of endangering national security.
Ocalan, being tried in absentia, was indicted for entering the country illegally, a misdemeanor.
Ocalan, leader of the Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, is serving a life sentence in Turkey for leading a 15-year insurgency against the country that left 37,000 people dead.
He is being tried in Greece in absentia.
Five of the U.S. sailors killed in the attack on the destroyer "USS Cole" are now home.
A military transport plane brought the flag-draped caskets from Germany where they were taken yesterday.
An honor guard removed them to a hangar at Dover Air Force base for a short memorial service for close family members.
They requested privacy for today's proceedings.
The bodies of two other sailors recovered from the ship are in Bahrain and will be returned later.
More than 100 FBI agents and explosives experts are expected in Yemen by the end of the weekend to investigate the suspected terrorist attack.
A team of special Naval engineers will work on recovering the bodies of ten sailors listed as missing and presumed dead.
Officials suspect a suicide bombing caused the blast, which tore a 40 foot hole in the hull of the destroyer.
Pentagon sources say an early examination finds 400 to 500 pounds of explosives may have been used.
There are no confirmed suspects yet, but officials say several Middle East groups are expected to be investigated.
The summit is coinciding with more unrest in several areas of the West Bank and Gaza strip.
Hundreds of stone-throwing Palestinians stormed the Israeli-controlled section of Hebron, breaking a curfew imposed since the outbreak of the unrest last month.
Witnesses said Israeli soldiers fired live ammunition and rubber-coated metal bullets, wounding at least seven people.
Thousands of Palestinian demonstrators marched in the area to protest against a renewal of contacts with Israel.
The nuclear submarine "Kursk" could become a permanent underwater grave for 118 Russian sailors.
Russia's top admiral says he may scrap efforts to recover the bodies if experts decide the mission would endanger deep sea divers.
All those aboard the "Kursk" were killed in August when the sub sank after being damaged by an explosion in the Barents Sea.
The cause of the disaster has not been determined.
An international salvage team is due to arrive at the scene of the accident tomorrow.
A U.S. businessman accused of spying says he has no chance of getting a fair trial in Russia.
Edmond Pope appeared in a Moscow courtroom today and read from a 40-page statement, denying charges of espionage, and protesting his treatment by the court.
Russian prosecutors say Pope tried to buy secret blueprints for a high-speed torpedo used by the Russian military.
Pope's supporters say he was seeking information on an old Russian underwater propulsion system.
President Clinton says he's willing to meet separately with Israeli and Palestinian leaders if both sides work to end the Mideast violence.
The president proposed the talks in a call to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
Mr. Clinton says he wants to see Arafat and Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak abide by promises to end the bloodshed made at last week's emergency summit in Egypt.
A White House spokesman says Arafat is reviewing the offer.
Meanwhile, some 30,000 anti-Israeli protesters clashed with police in Jordan.
Demonstrators from across the country traveled to a west bank border town to call for the return of Palestinian refugees.
The number of police and protesters who were injured is still not known.
A note from a doomed sailor raises new questions about Russian efforts to save the crew of the submarine "Kursk."
The note was found in the pocket of a sailor whose body was recovered yesterday.
It was written after explosions sent the "Kursk" to the bottom of the sea.
It confirms 23 sailors survived.
For days, teams tried without success to open the escape hatch.
It was pried open by divers from Norway who found no one left alive.
Relatives have complained some sailors might have been rescued had Russia sought help immediately.
The widow of the sailor who wrote the note wept today as she was interviewed on Russian television.
I came here after I heard the official announcement on TV.
I love him very much.
I want to see him and I want to read his letter.
While the cause of the "Kursk" disaster remains unknown, Russian officials say the sub may have collided with a World War II mine or there may have been an internal malfunction.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres is expected to meet soon with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in an attempt to quell Mideast violence.
The meeting comes amid fresh clashes between the two sides.
Fighting broke out in Ramallah, Hebron and at the border crossings between Israel and Gaza today.
Three Palestinians were killed, at least 49 people wounded.
Overnight, Israeli gunships attacked three headquarters of Fatah, the political party allied with Arafat.
Israel calls it a response to Palestinian guerrilla warfare.
Arafat is condemning the attacks.
A verdict handed down three years ago today brought debate from both sides of the Atlantic.
In this edition of "Headliners," Bob Glascoff has the story of British au pair Louise Woodward and finds out what she's doing now.
October 1997.
Louise Woodward is sentenced to life in prison on charges she murdered an infant boy.
Woodward, then a 19-year-old au pair from Britain, was accused of killing 8-month-old Matthew Eappen by shaking him and slamming his head.
The case attracted widespread attention in England, where many thought she was innocent.
Woodward had been living with the Eappen family taking care of their two young sons.
Despite receiving a life sentence, her charges were reduced two weeks later from second-degree murder to manslaughter.
She was sentenced to time served and released.
Woodward returned to Britain in 1998 to another controversy.
Her parents were accused of defrauding her defense fund.
They went on trial this year and were acquitted.
Today, Woodward is studying to be a lawyer.
With "Headliners," I'm Bob Glascoff.
An Oregon girl missing for 15 years has been reunited with her family.
The mother says her daughter was taken by her baby-sitter when she was just 3 years old.
The alleged abduction of Fallon Marie Hodges was never reported to police.
Authorities say the girl contacted law enforcement in Nevada last Friday saying she needed help in finding her identity.
She says she was abandoned by her surrogate parents, one of whom was her alleged kidnapper.
The name Father Frost may not be familiar to you, but to Russian children, Christmas wouldn't be the same without him.
Denise Dillon reports.
Santa Claus visited the northern Russian city of Veliki Ustyug to meet with his Russian counterpart, Father Frost.
It's believed Veliki Ustyug, which is about 600 miles north of Moscow, is the hometown of Father Frost, one of the main characters of Russian Christmas stories.
The 50,000 residents here have a deep respect for the history of their town, and it seemed as though all of them bundled up against the cold and came out to welcome Santa and Father Frost as they rode into the town's central square on a horse-drawn carriage.
People who live here hope this is the beginning of a long tradition that others around the world will celebrate with them.
A new great holiday came to our town.
This is how new traditions are generated.
And I hope this holiday will become nationwide soon.
As for us, we are always happy to see guests in our town.
When Santa arrived, the temperature was 16 degrees below 0, but that did not stop the Russian folk singers and dancers from performing traditional dances.
Later, Santa visited Father Frost's home, where they met with all the good little boys and girls.
When you believe in Santa Claus, then you are good people and good children.
Then your dreams can come true.
Children around the world believe that Santa Claus or Father Frost will bring them good luck, and presents, for the holidays.
Denise Dillon, "Headline News."
A woman whose husband was killed in last month's crash of a Singapore Airlines plane has filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the carrier.
Investigators say the Boeing 747 hit a barrier and a crane on the runway and exploded during takeoff.
82 people were killed.
The lawsuit filed in Federal court says negligence and reckless misconduct contributed to the crash.
A spokesman for Singapore Airlines declined to comment.
The Navy now says it will cost about $240 million to get the "USS Cole" up and running again.
Officials originally estimated it would cost $150 million to repair the gaping hole in the ship's midsection.
But a Naval official says that does not include the cost of replacing equipment and weapons damaged in the attack carried out by suicide bombers in Yemen.
The ship is scheduled to arrive in Mississippi in about ten days.
Russia's Presidential Clemency Commission is advising president Vladimir Putin to release convicted American spy Edmund Pope on humanitarian grounds.
A top Putin aide says Pope could be home by Christmas.
However, according to Russian law, Putin cannot issue a pardon any earlier than December.
Pope was convicted of espionage Wednesday in Moscow and sentenced to 20 years in prison.
He suffers from a rare form of bone cancer and has asked Putin to let him return to the U.S. to receive medical care.
Ousted Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif is heading to exile in Saudi Arabia.
He left Pakistan yesterday, after being pardoned by the president.
Sharif had been in jail since his ouster in a military coup last year.
He was convicted of kidnapping and corruption.
Saudi Arabia offered to accept Sharif and more than a dozen members of his family on humanitarian grounds.
Will winter storms affect the weather where you are?
Let's check the "Headline News" extended forecast.
Another round of winter weather is expected today as another major winter storm will be spreading from the southern plains through the Ohio River valley and eventually into the Northeast.
Cities like Springfield, Missouri, back towards St. Louis and Indianapolis and Columbus will pick up the heaviest snowfall.
Over six inches is expected by tomorrow morning, and then moving in towards the northeast, where we expect even some ice in some of the suburbs to the northwestern areas of New York City.
Here's a look at the forecast weather map -- slow pressure is moving in towards the Ohio River valley and eventually into the northeast by late tomorrow.
It's moving rather quickly, too, so the precipitation will be ending through the Midwest as high pressure builds in tomorrow.
Look for the snow to continue into New England tomorrow.
Friday, rain into the southeast.
There will be some showers in the Northwest.
Temperature-wise, it remains cold over the northern tier.
It begins to warm up over parts of the south.
A wet day on Saturday over much of the East and Southeast.
There'll be some snows, though, back into the Midwest.
Forecast highs are still on the cold side.
And as we check out Sunday's weather, snow through the great lakes and rain into the Northeast with forecast highs mainly in the over the northeastern U.S.
I'm meteorologist Dave Hennen.
For more weather information, login to cnn.com.
The damaged "USS Cole" comes home today.
It's due to arrive in Pascagoula, Mississippi, this morning.
The destroyer was christened there five years ago.
Repairs are expected to cost about $240 million.
Yemeni and U.S. authorities are still investigating the October bombing.
17 sailors were killed.
Yemen's Prime Minister says at least three Yemenis will go on trial next month in connection with the attack.
They're suspected of belonging to an international terrorist network.
Edmund Pope, the U.S. businessman convicted of espionage in Russia, is offering the first details of his eight-month stay in a Moscow prison.
Speaking from a U.S. military hospital in Germany, Pope says he was treated well by prison guards, but suffered from mental anguish and depression.
Today, Pope is undergoing an extensive medical checkup, to see if there is any recurrence of bone cancer.
He's undergoing tests for skin cancer as well.
He will wait for the results before returning home to the U.S.
Pope was pardoned yesterday by Russian president Vladimir Putin.
U.S. and Yemeni officials have released a photo of one of the suicide bombers killed in the attack on the "USS Cole" in the port of Aden October.
17 U.S. sailors were killed and 39 others hurt.
The officials say Yemeni national Hussan Saeed Awad Al-Khamri was described by a boy as having launched the boat used in the attack.
Six possible suspects are still being held in Yemen pending a trial that could start as early as next month.
Investigators say they're still looking for other key suspects.
Many people in North America will be able to experience a partial solar eclipse tomorrow.
But scientists say it won't block much Christmas sunlight in most places.
As always, eclipse fans are being warned not to look directly at the Sun because that can cause permanent eye damage.
The eclipse will occur at around 12 P.M. Eastern Time.
The best view will be in the Northeast.
Welcome all to my new site.
I've decided to incorporate my old work blog into a general blog, the work diary is up on the right titled "my work diary".
EFF YEAH!
BUSH WON!
OK then.
My next thought.
The world is a much better place now that the terrorist Yassar Arafat is dead.
Here is a good one minute video on his great legacy Here.
This guy was one of the early innovators of terrorism in this century and he is protrayed by the Main Stream Media (MSM for short) as a "freedom fighter".
Because of him millions of palestinians chose "jihad" over peace with Isreal.
He innovated suicide bombers and plane hijacking plus he embezzelled hundreds of millions of dollars from aid funds.
...and this guy got a nobel peace prize, what a disgrace.
UPDATE 1 - Drudge is reporting that Arafat has been skimming 2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories.
MAG: Arafat Skimmed $2 Million a Month From the Gas Trade Sun Nov 14 2004 09:53:40 ETNew York.
-- Last year auditors discovered Arafat was guilty of skimming $2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories, TIME reports.
In August 2002 international donors forced Arafat to sign over his investments to the Palestine Investment Fund, which was audited by U.S. accountants and managed by Palestinian Finance Minister Salam Fayyad, a former International Monetary Fund official.
After scouring corporations throughout the Arab world and bank accounts in the Cayman Islands and Luxembourg, the auditors identified $800 million, which has been made a part of the Palestinian Authority's official budget.
It's the most successful financial reform in the Arab world, -- Jim Prince, president of the Los Angeles-based Democracy Council and head of the audit team, tells TIME.
People close to Fayyad's investigation told TIME of Arafat's skimming from the gas trade.
Breaking the gasoline smuggling and corruption boosted the Palestinian Authority's official treasury by $10 million a month and cut gas prices for ordinary Palestinians.
"Arafat's death means his followers may never know just how much more they may be owed, "writes TIME's Matt Rees in "Where's Arafat's Money?"
In the mid-1990s, Arafat controlled a financial empire worth at least $3 billion.
By the time of his death, he was down to his last $1 billion, according to Israeli-intelligence estimates.
Arafat wife Suha's outburst that his successors were "trying to bury [him] alive" came after she learned that Arafat had signed over at least $800 million to the government of the Palestinian Authority two years ago, TIME reports.
Top Palestinian officials say Suha wants the new chief of the P.L.O., Mahmoud Abbas, and Palestinian prime minister Ahmed Qurei to give her money out of the P.L.O.'s party coffers.
But a senior P.L.O. official tells TIME, "they'll pay her a pension, and that's it."
People familiar with Arafat's finances say the Palestinian leader sent Suha $200,000 a month out of the Palestinian Authority's budget for the Office of the President.
French authorities are investigating transfers of $15 million from Swiss banks to Paris accounts in Suha's name at the Arab Bank and at BNP Paribas Bank, a French bank, TIME reports.
Senior Palestinian security officials tell TIME that Arafat also shipped money to the gunmen of the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.
Developing.
.. Sure sounds like a Nobel Prize winner to me.
Time is reporting today that a al-Qaeda operative was captured and is spitting out that they have plans in the work to smuggle nukes into the US from Mexico, see the article here.
Thank god Bush is still our president, although I strongly disagree with him on his new immigration policy.
This policy would just make it easier for the enemy to get within our borders.
Just reported from AP that Condi Rice has been chosen by President Bush to become the new Secretary of State for his second term.
I agree with his choice and think she will make a much better Secretary then Powell did.
Her views are much more in step with the President then Powell, although he was a true soldier and carried the message.
Plus, any lady who works out to Led Zeppelin and is a Football nut is alright in my book.
Thanks to Captain Ed for bringing this up.
Apparently James Baker, former Secretary of State and current envoy for the Bush Administration, has asked the Isreali government to release a scumbag terrorist to promote "peace".
There is now ... in an Israeli prison a man named Marwan Barghouti, who is one of the young guard of Palestinians, and if the Palestinians are going to make this work against the really hard-line elements, the Islamists and some of the people of Hamas, they're going to have to have a coalition of the young guard and the old guard.
Gotta say that this shocked me, I've always thought Mr. Baker was a upstanding guy but this is just plain good old fashioned bullcrap.
Here are some of the fine achievements of the terrorist Marwan Barghouti Marwan Barghouti (born June 6, 1958) is a Palestinian leader from the West Bank and a leader of the Fatah movement that forms the backbone of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
On June 6, 2004, he was sentenced to five life sentences for five murders of Israeli civilians and 40 years imprisonment for attempted murders in terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians.
Barghouti was one of the major leaders of the First Intifada in 1987, leading Palestinians in a mass uprising against Israeli occupation of the West Bank.
During the uprising, he was arrested by Israel and deported to Jordan, where he stayed for seven years until he was permitted to return under the terms of the Oslo Accords in 1994.
In 1996, he was elected to the Palestinian Legislative Council, in which he advocated peace with Israel, sometimes coming in conflict with Yasser Arafat.
The formal position occupied by Barghouti was the General Secretary of Fatah in the West Bank.
By the summer of 2000, Barghouti and Arafat had grown increasingly at odds with each other, with Barghouti accusing Arafat's administration of corruption and his security services of human rights violations, and Arafat was planning to fire him shortly.
However, as the Second Intifada began, Barghouti became increasingly popular as a leader of the Fatah Tanzim militia.
This was perhaps due to the transformation of Tanzim into an organization more resembling militant groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad, responsible for dozens of civilian deaths in drive-by shootings.
Under Barghouti, the Tanzim has also carried out suicide bombings in Israel under the name al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades.
What is he thinking?
Release a known terrorist to run the PLO and that will bring about peace, give me a effin break.
Chris Matthews, that idiot talking head over at MSNBC, said yesterday about the terrorists we fought in Fallujah "a rival, I mean they're not bad guys especially, just people who just disagree with us".
...this just amazes me, the complete idiocy of this waste of human sperm.
These are the same terrorists blowing up families, chopping off heads of civilians, and the complete disregard for any human life and they just disagree with us?
Tell that to the family of Margaret Hassan, the school teacher who was brutally tortured and then slaughtered by these same guys, they ain't so bad are they Chris Matthews?
This women who was known for her 30 years of work in Iraq, distributing medicine, food and supplies to Iraqis suffering under the sanctions of the 1990s.
British officials say they believe Hassan was a blindfolded woman seen being shot in the head by a hooded militant on a video obtained but not aired by the Arab television station Al-Jazeera.
She would be the first foreign woman to die in the wave of kidnappings in Iraq.
No group has claimed responsibility.
On Sunday, Marines found the mutilated body of what they believe was a Western woman on a street in Fallujah during the U.S. assault on the insurgent stronghold.
The body, clothed in what appeared to be a purple, velour dress, was wrapped in a blanket, with a blood-soaked black cloth nearby.
As of Tuesday night, the U.S. command said the body had not been identified.
These are the reasons that none of these mothereffers should ever see the light of day.
..they need to be all lined up and shot.
Torturing this poor women for what?
WHAT?
And we should treat them as enemy soldiers under the Geneva Convention.
Last I remember the convention applies to countries that signed the document and the two countries must have standing armies with uniforms.
...the Iraqi military is at our side, the terrorists are not.
Since when are terrorists soldiers?
They are lower then dogs.
Finally there is this written by a student of Mrs. Hassan She was my English teacher.
In the memory of my teacher and a fellow aid worker colleague Mrs. M. Hassan.
Mrs. Hassan was my English teacher in The British Council in Baghdad in Al-Wazirya district, I remember her years ago with her Irish accent telling me it's not Important how many words I must learn but the pronunciation of the words I already knew must be perfected.
Mrs. Hassan speak s perfect Arabic and she has a heart of gold, she's been killed by (men in pajamas), turn Iraq upside down and find them.
The Marines will find them, and when they do they shall die.
2Slick pointed me to a article at In Iraq For 365.
This is a great blog and I encourage you all to read it regularly.
On Sunday he wrote of two Iraqi soldiers who didn't see us as conquerors but as allies when the Mosul bombing occurred.
The suicide bomb sprayed bb-like fragments throughout the Marez dining facility.
One piece of shrapnel sliced through the femoral artery of a U.S. soldier and his only chance for survival was in the hands of these two Iraqis.
Recalling the medical classes they'd received from the special forces, the Iraqis reacted calmly, fastening a belt above the wound, creating a tourniquet, which stopped the gushing stream of red.
They moved the soldier to a MEDVAC vehicle via two-man litter carry.
After they hoisted the soldier in the truck, the two Iraqis -- one an officer, the other an NCO -- ran back to the facility and began treating the other wounded without regard for their safety.
When the dust settled and the mess tent had been evacuated, everybody who could talk was questioned about their health.
When the medics came to the two Iraqis, the ING soldiers only wanted to know how everybody else was.
When asked why did they do it, they simply stated, "this was our duty; we are a team, and we take care of each other."
Even the Americans.
No matter what the MSM tries to tell you, there are Iraqi's who will help the allies, who will fight alongside them and put their lives at risk to make sure Democracy succeeds in their country.
This brings to mind a speech Prime Minister Tony Blair gave recently while visiting Iraq.
When I meet the people working alongside the United Nations--Iraqis in fear of their life every day, because they are trying to bring freedom and democracy to their people--when I see their courage and their determination and know that they speak for the vast majority of people in Iraq who want that democracy and freedom, then I know that we are doing the right thing.
And I will also say this to you: There are people dying in Iraq, but the reason people are dying is because of the terrorism and the intimidation and the people who are deliberately killing anyone trying to make this country better.
Now what should our response be as an international community?
Our response should be to stand alongside the democrats--the people who've got the courage to see this thing through--and help them see it through.
I've got no doubt at all that that is the right thing for us to do.
Sometimes when I see some of the reporting of what's happening in Iraq in the rest of the world, I just feel that people should understand how precious what has been created here is.
And those people from that electoral commission that I described as the heroes of the new Iraq--every day ... a lot of them aren't living in the Green Zone, they've got to travel in from outside.
They do not know at any point in time whether they're going to be subject to brutality or intimidation, even death, and yet they carry on doing it.
Now what a magnificent example of the human spirit--that's the side we should be on.
This recent news story is troubling in many different ways.
When I first heard of the story I figured it was some wackjob playing with a new toy but now we find out there have been 7 incidents since Christmas from the West to East coast.
The FBI, concerned that terrorists could use lasers as weapons, is investigating why laser beams were directed into the cockpits of seven airplanes in flight since Christmas.
Laser beams can temporarily blind or disorient pilots and possibly cause a plane to crash.
The FBI is looking into two incidents in Colorado Springs, Colo., and one each in Cleveland, Washington, Houston, Teterboro, N.J., and Medford, Ore., according to federal and local law enforcement and transportation officials, some of whom spoke only on condition of anonymity.
A federal law enforcement official, who declined to be identified by name, said Thursday there is no evidence of a plot or terrorist activity.
But pilots are troubled by the incidents, and the FBI earlier this month warned of the possibility that terrorists might use the devices as weapons.
"It's not some kid," said Paul Rancatore, a pilot who serves as deputy chairman of the security committee for the Allied Pilots Association.
"It's too organized."
Loren Thompson, who teaches military technology at Georgetown University, called it a "rather worrisome development," though he said experts would be more puzzled than alarmed.
"What we're talking about is a fairly powerful visible light laser that has the ability to lock onto a fast-moving aircraft," Thompson said.
"That's not the sort of thing you pick up at a military surplus store."
Thompson said a piece of equipment that could do the things the FBI suspects would be "fairly expensive and fairly sophisticated."
"It sounds like an organized effort to cause airline accidents," Thompson said.
Michelle Malkin has a post about this today where some outlets have stopped selling lasers.
Lots of people think that these indeed might be loonies playing with new Christmas toys but I disagree.
These are incidents where the Airplanes were tracked , some as high as 8500 feet.
To track a fast moving plane at that altitude would not be some toy you can get from the local wal-mart.
In my opinion this is quite alarming.
This Isn't Writing, It's Typing has a great post out with a ton of info, some of it quite scary A more frightening scenario is that terrorists may have obtained a Chinese-produced ZM-87 laser blinder which is specifically designed to blind eyesight.
The Japanese terrorist cult Aum Shinrikyo--which launched the infamous Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway system in 1995--was discovered to have experimented with the use of lasers as weapons.
According to The Asian Pacific Post, "Cult members apparently obtained laser design information from Russian institutes they visited and built a laser weapon mounted on a truck.
They had planned to use the laser against Tokyo policemen, but the plan failed when the laser malfunctioned during the testing stage."
PoliticAlex also has some info on this story also.
I found the following report that was presented to Congress recently about the shoulder launched missle threat to airliners, which this might very well be a precursor to: Recent events have focused attention on the threat that terrorists with shoulder fired surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), referred to as Man-Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS), pose to commercial airliners.
Most believe that no single solution exists to effectively mitigate this threat.
Instead, a menu of options may be considered, including installing infrared (IR) countermeasures on aircraft; modifying flight operations and air traffic control procedures; improving airport and regional security; and strengthening missile non-proliferation efforts.
Equipping aircraft with missile countermeasure systems can protect the aircraft even when operating in areas where ground-based security measures are unavailable or infeasible to implement.
However, this option has a relatively high cost, between $1 million and $3 million per aircraft, and the time needed for implementation does not allow for immediate response to the existing terrorist threat.
Procedural improvements such as specific flight crew training, altering air traffic procedures to minimize exposure to the threat, and improved security near airports may be less costly than countermeasures and could more immediately help deter domestic terrorist attacks.
However, these techniques by themselves cannot completely mitigate the risk of domestic attacks and would not protect U.S. airliners flying to and from foreign airports.
Legislation introduced in the 108th Congress (H.R. 580, S. 311) calls for the installation of missile defense systems in all turbojet aircraft used in scheduled air carrier service.
While this legislation is still under consideration, Homeland Security appropriations designated $60 million in FY2004 and $61 million in FY2005 to fund a program to develop and test prototype missile countermeasure systems for commercial aircraft based on existing military technology.
It is anticipated that at the conclusion of this program, in January 2006, the Department of Homeland Security will be able to provide a detailed analysis of the suitability of such systems for use to protect commercial passenger aircraft.
American Future has a link up to a article written in yesterdays Houston Chronicle.
It describes how the European Governments look to be changing their tune in regards to President Bush.
Why you ask?
But there is arguably more to this sea change than just a grumpy acceptance of the status quo.
From a European perspective, three things are making it easier to warm to the Bush White House.
One is the death of Yasser Arafat.
No issue divides Europe and the United States more keenly than the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
For the last few years, Europeans have criticized Bush for failing to put enough pressure on Israel to get out of the occupied territories and for refusing to deal with Arafat.
That another reason why I respect Bush so much, his refusal to acknowledge that windbag terrorist Arafat.
May he rot in hell.
But since Arafat's death, Europeans and Americans have been able to find common ground: supporting Ariel Sharon's withdrawal from Gaza, putting pressure on Israel to let the Palestinians hold elections and, covertly, backing Mahmoud Abbas to become the next Palestinian leader.
A second reason is Europe's growing worries about Islamic terrorism.
The murder in November of Theo van Gogh, a provocative Dutch filmmaker, at the hands of an Islamic militant has been called Europe's 9/11.
Though the two events are obviously not fully comparable, it is certainly true that American conservatives, such as Francis Fukuyama and Bernard Lewis, have found a wider audience recently for the idea that radical Islam is inimical to European traditions of tolerance.
You mean those radical muslims can be kinda nasty sometimes?
Get outta here.
...Keep doing business like the cowards in Spain and they will more then likely have their very own 9/11 to cry about.
The third force is the reappearance, albeit in a milder form, of the threat that kept the trans-Atlantic alliance together for half a century.
The Russian bear is growling again.
The Ukrainian election --- complete with its KGB-style poisoning of the opposition leader and heavy-handed electoral fraud -- has reminded European diplomats of Vladimir V. Putin's determination to control his "near abroad."
They should be very worried about this item, I believe Putin is slowly sliding Russia back to what it once was.
Hopefully our Government isn't asleep at the wheel with this situation either.
There is a personal edge to all this.
Just as the snooty continentals eventually came to admire the gormless Hollywood actor, there is a grudging willingness to rethink some prejudices about the inarticulate Texan.
Many European leaders once swallowed the Michael Moore version of history: that Bush was an ignorant interloper who stole the White House.
His thumping re-election, however, shows that he represents a large body of conservative American opinion.
In short, Europeans are getting used to the idea that it is not Bush who is the exception, but the U.S. itself that is exceptional --- and that if they want to deal with this exceptional superpower they need to humor it rather than rile it.
Strangely enough, this has been Tony Blair's strategy all along; it is rapidly becoming the Continent's strategy, too.
Couldn't of ended that article any better myself.
Get used to it France, we ain't going nowhere.
Nicolae Mischie, authoritarian leader of a district organization of the main opposition party, has been jailed.
Romania voted in the last December, ousting the so-called socialist party PSD (Social-Democratic Party).
PSD managed to keep a stronghold in poor rural areas, with the help of people like Mischie.
They combined blackmail, using their right of decision regarding the public funds for local leaders opposing PSD, and strong seduction of the uneducated masses, in a marvelous way.
E.g., Mischie, who talks like an idiot, got a PhD in history.
His paper was on a political personality of the 19th century and Mischie bought the house where his paper's subject lived.
Maybe he tried to invest in his paper, maybe he believed sincerely in his admiration for the poor innocent dead guy and his ability of earning PhDs, but using a big car and living in a big house are signs for the masses that the man is an invaluable and irreplaceable leader.
Another misleading sign was his position as a University professor - he was teaching mostly at private universities, which are still ways to buy diplomas here in Romania.
Local leaders did their jobs, but national leaders, pressuring TV stations to lie, associating with old communist ex-president Ion Iliescu, failed to win in big cities.
PSD is building a strategy for the 4 years to come and they are going to elect a leader.
It is known that communist leaders die in office (as judges of the U.S. Supreme Court) and Ion Iliescu won't be different.
All the leaders that expressed different points of view will be excluded from the party, that's the untold truth that Romanian media seem to hide or not conceive yet.
Mischie was right to criticize the national leaders, because PSD got a good share in the elections in his area.
But Mischie was wrong, because he did that while in vacation in Switzerland, where you can't go if you earn 20K $ a year.
The new power had nothing to do, but let the policemen do what they should be doing years ago.
Iliescu and Nastase, ex-president and ex-prime minister, are now left only with the leadership of the party and holding this illusory authority.
If Mischie wouldn't take his chance on them, he would still be free, with the help of the weak and weakening strings Iliescu might still pull.
The interim government declared a state of emergency in Iraq excluding the Kurdish region for 60 days, according to the National Security Law introduced last August which states that emergency laws can be declared in the country for a period no more than 60 days provided a serious threat against Iraqi national security is recognised by the interim government.
Obviously, this is a necessary step that should have been taken at least two months ago.
Suicide bombings and guerrilla attacks carried out by insurgents and foreign terrorists based around Baghdad have escalated to alarming levels particularly during Ramadan.
Deputy governor of Diyala along with several council members from Ba'quba were ambushed and killed in Latifiya south of Baghdad, an area which has supposedly been 'cleared' from insurgents a couple of weeks ago.
Four suicide attacks in Samarra, also a recently 'liberated' area, against National Guard units and the governorate building.
Zarqawi's group claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Three police stations in Haditha, a small town west of Ramadi, were assaulted by groups of insurgents.
Some 30 policemen were captured, tied up and executed in cold blood against the walls following a confrontation which lasted two hours.
Zarqawi's group, again, claiming responsibility.
A full-scale military operation against Fallujah, which is apparently underway already, seems to be the government's 'final solution'.
I'm not optimistic to the outcome, especially when significant civilian casualties are unavoidable.
Note, that I'm not suggesting a peaceful or political solution would work either in these areas.
Insurgents west of Baghdad have quite obstinately made it clear that nothing but full control of the country, or at least the Anbar governorate, will satisfy them.
They have refused to participate in the political process, they have repeatedly announced their intentions to boycott the elections and to disrupt them in other areas, and they do not recognise the government or any other authority in the country beside themselves.
The demands of the Fallujah negotiants from the government weeks ago were obscene and they clearly reflect the overt sectarianism and regionalism of the armed groups in the area.
The demands were not released to the Iraqi public at the time for unkown reasons but they have leaked out days ago.
Here are just a few of them:
-A clear timetable for the withdrawal of foreign occupation forces.
(fair enough).
-Immediate withdrawal of US and Iraqi security forces from the Anbar governorate and the handover of security responsibilities to former army officers from Anbar.
-The appointment of ministers from the Anbar governorate to the ministries of Interior, Defense, Oil and Finance.
-The removal of certain officials (most of them from Shi'ite Islamic parties such as Ibrahim Al-Ja'fari) from governmental positions.
-The complete return of Ba'athists, army officers, Republican Guards, Mukhabarat, intelligence and security personnel to their former positions.
-The removal of Shi'ite Edhan (call for prayers) from official television and radio programs.
-Incomes of Shi'ite sacred shrines should be returned under the control of the Ministry of Endowments and Religious Affairs.
These last two demands have been allegedly added by Sheikh Harith Al-Dhari (head of the Association of Muslim Scholars) and are said to have been a major reason behind the failure of negotiations with the government.
Iraqis here in the south were shocked to hear of these demands and sectarian tensions are on the rise.
It scares me to see the reaction of people around me whenever Fallujah is mentioned.
The director of a primary health care clinic was remarking the other day that "Fallujah should be burnt upon its residents and then razed to the ground.
They are the sons of Mu'awiya, may Allah curse them all."
Sidenote: Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan was the governor of Syria during the 7th century and he fought Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (Muhammed's son-in-law) over the Caliphate after the assassination of Caliph Othman.
He became the first Ummayid Caliph and two decades later, under the Caliphate of his son Yazid, Imam Hussein bin Ali (grandson of Muhammed) was killed by his armies at present day Karbala.
Someone hushed the director and pointed out to him that I'm Sunni.
He was a bit embarrassed and tried to explain that he was referring to Wahhabis and foreign fighters.
It was a bit uncomfortable and I could feel that people were giving me furtive glances.
Refugees have been pouring out of Fallujah over the last few days into Baghdad and the surrounding areas.
The military operation will undoubtly aggravate the humanitarian situation inside the city since there are definitely thousands of families with no place to go.
Refugees in Baghdad have confirmed the rumours that the 'Mujahideen' are forcing men from 15-50 years old to stay and that they were threatened with execution if they refuse to carry arms in defense of the town.
Majlis Shura Al-Mujahideen (The Mujahideen Advisory Council) are in control of Fallujah and they have distributed a statement inviting Arab and foreign (including American) media reporters to enter the town and cover the battles.
The statement carried the insignia of Zarqawi's group Qa'idat Al-Jihad.
Everyone is closely watching what the next few days will bring, hoping the violence doesn't spread to the streets of Baghdad or other areas.
I'm still holed up in Basrah but I'll try to be on the road as soon as possible.
Gazprom, the main Russian gas company, has been denied a $10 billion credit line due to the political situation in Russia.
The company intended to use the cash to pay an artificially low price for Yukos assets (hence that firm's bankruptcy filing a few days ago -- you know it's bad when you have to use US courts to protect your own assets from appropriation by your home country).
It's starting to look like Putin's goal is a sort of judicial nationalization -- taking control of key assets through court, rather than executive, fiat.
But the markets have caught on, and Russia may be deprived of the capital it needs to grow.
Don't expect any of the Russian leadership to reverse course; given the current trends there, they'll just Blame the West when their screwy plan screws them over.
One of the rules of thumb that has guided my (limited) business career from the beginning is that China is never as lucrative as it looks.
This assumption is based on about 150 years of economic history, including several booms in interest and investment in China.
Their biggest problem: There's usually a 200-to-1 ratio of Nearly Starving Peasant Laborers to Absurdly Well-Off Government Employees.
And now it's an iffier 100-to-1, since there are also rich private sector employees and the labor force isn't quite so expendable.
What they've been missing for years was the real driver behind any consumer economy: Consumers.
Specifically, they didn't have a real middle class.
That's changed in the last twenty years, as increasing social mobility and a burst in foreign demand has finally made China a genuine, rather than theoretical, contender.
And they've even supplied proof of their economic viability, announcing that they've beaten Japan for exports to the US.
If only I'd figured this out in early 2002, when their stock market was by some stretch of the imagination cheap.
I dunno if you want anything to do with their stock market.
For one, its perforance last year was pretty dismal.
More importantly, its a structural nuthouse.
Unfortunately, minority shareholder rights are virtually non-existent, and excluding the dodgy financial statements listed on the exchange, lots of times companies are more interested in generating cash from an IPO then actually bothering with shareholder value.
This Economist article (not sure if registration is required, sorry):
http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=1447832
http://www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?story_id=1447832
Finally, the Shanghai Composite on July, 1997 was trading at 1189.76.
As of January 27, 2005 it's sitting at 1225.89.
That's an annualized return of roughly 0.4%.
The 5 year return is even worse (http://finance.yahoo.com/q/bc?s=^SSEC&amp;t=5y).
You haven't missed much :).
Apparently Yuganskneftegaz, which was sold to an independent buyer who turned out to be an apparatus of the state (yes, the same state that 1) forced Yukos to do the auction, and 2) ran the auction, not that 3) this is suspicious or anything), and which was then being bought with foreign assistance, is not being bought with foreign assistance.
As of this morning, at least.
Anyway, it looks like they're denying Chinese involvement to avoid a lawsuit , which is funny -- you'd think they might know someone in the Russian judiciary who could help them out.
Apparently Carly made a lot of journalistic enemies during her six hears at HP.
Not only was the catalyst for her fall from grace a Fortune article by Carol Loomis (who as far as I know is immortal -- she's been writing for Fortune since 1954), but the anti-Carly brigades are out in full force at Salon.com.
This is getting a little harsh; she might have messed up at HP (I refuse to call it by the new name, for now), but she wasn't actively trying to destroy a great company and wreck the shareholders.
It just, well, happened.
So, right, Carly was a bad manager, and she eventually got what she deserved, but she isn't evil incarnate.
I was hoping for another incredibly drawn-out story, full of antitrust drama, lurking potential bidders, and contentious confrontations between executives.
And then MCI just sort of accepted a Verizon deal without really bothering anybody.
Clearly, their corporate culture has suffered -- 25 years ago, MCI was the brawling upstart in the telecom industry, constantly challenging AT&T's right to exist, much less to monopolize the phone system.
And now, they're swallowed by Just Another Monolith.
I expected better -- meaner and tougher, sure, but better nonetheless.
Read this report on the U.S.-Russia Technology Symposium.
It's a great summary of the paradoxes of the Russian economy: They have a huge untapped supply of valuable IT labor, but their IT exports are only a tenth of their military exports (and only a thirtieth of India's IT exports).
They develop lots of new technology, but nobody can tell who owns what.
And, of course, their securities laws and property rights are even flimsier than China's -- after the Putin administration mugged Yukos on the grounds that it was too attractive a target to leave alone, they lost a lot of trust.
Still, they have an unbelieveable amount of untapped potential.
The following a grim story out of Russia tonight where there's proof some of the sailors on board that Russian nuclear submarine the Kursk initially survived the explosion that sank the sub, only to be trapped later.
One of the sailors wrote a letter during those terrible final hours.
Today, 10 weeks after a mysterious accident sent the Kursk to the bottom of the Barents sea, a grisly discovery.
In the pocket of one of the crew, a handwritten note, dying words of a sailor trapped alive in the sunken sub.
He is this lieutenant captain, seen here three years ago aboard the Kursk.
His last words tell a chilling tail -- tale of a desperate but future ill attempt to escape.
It now appears 23 survived -- survived the initial explosion.
The 23 frantically scrambled to the rear of the sub.
They find the escape hatch flooded and seal themselves in compartment nine.
Realizing he will die, he begins to write.
He addressed the letter to his wife, Olga.
He is my dear, dear beloved.
I want to see him again, read his letter.
The chilling account raises new questions and criticisms of the Russian navy, which waited several days before attempting to launch any rescue mission
But navy officials here at the Pentagon say any rescue attempt would have failed, that there really was no hope for the 23 survivors.
It's believed they would have frozen to death in hours, long before they ran out of air.
That may be little consolation for the families.
NBC News correspondent Jim Miklaszweski, the pentagon.
Program note here.
Coming up tonight at 10:00 p.m. eastern, a closer look at the Kursk and similar disasters that have taken place at sea.
An investigation is under way into a fatal airliner accident in Mexico last night.
It happened as the DC-9 was trying to land during a rainstorm.
The Aero Mexico jet skidded off a runway and into a neighborhood in the town of Reynosa, about 50 miles from Brownsville, Texas.
Four people on the ground were killed.
But the 83 people aboard the plane escaped with only scrapes and bruises.
We have been here so many times before the threat of a wider war in the middle east.
There has been impressive progress but a lasting past remains elusive.
President Clinton today considered flying to the middle east for an emergency summit meeting, but he backed away.
How did it come to this so swiftly?
Here's Andrea Mitchell.
Reporter:
The president returns to Washington today, hoping to salvage something from eight years of Middle East diplomacy.
What went wrong?
To many peace seemed so close at Camp David in July.
How did it all fall apart?
First, Palestinian resentment.
On the street, people see no economic rewards, aren't any better off after years of peace talks, and they resent the U.S. for blaming Arafat when the summit collapses while praising Israel's prime minister Barak.
The prime minister moved forward more from his initial position than chairman Arafat, particularly surrounding the questions of Jerusalem.
It's quite clear the Palestinians do not accept the various proposals put forward to divide Jerusalem.
Reporter:
Arafat appears weak, and radical groups like Hamas gain strength.
A weakened Arafat emboldens a great deal of forces that does not want peace.
Reporter:
Second, Israeli frustration.
Many Israelis feel Barak goes too far by offering Arafat partial control of the holy sites, gets nothing in return.
I think Barak was very forthcoming at Camp David.
The intransigence or failure of Arafat to come forward with any counterproposal I think frustrated the prime minister and frustrated the Israelis.
Reporter:
Finally, the summit raises false hopes, is not well prepared by Washington.
The U.S. rushes ahead, eager for a breakthrough before the end of Clinton's term.
Other Arab leaders like Mubarak of Egypt and Fahd of Saudi Arabia are not sold on the deal, tell Arafat to hold out.
If a concerted effort was put together to consult with these people and bring them on board, then probably Arafat would have been able to cut a deal.
I think the United States did not prepare adequately for Camp David.
They should have been much more careful in the preparation and more assured of getting some kind of an agreement.
Reporter:
With most observers saying that Camp David only made a bad situation worse, questions tonight as to why the president would even consider going to another summit with even less hope of a solution.
Washington.
With the presidential debate tonight in St. Louis, the candidates will be in the middle of a hot political issue that's not getting much national attention -- what to do about the Missouri river, the fabled waterway of Lewis and Clark that joins the Mississippi in St. Louis.
It's a far different river now than it once was, and the question is -- should it be allowed to return to its true form?
NBC's national correspondent is Jim Avila.
Reporter:
The wide Missouri, pioneers called it  -- too thick to drink, too thin to plow.
A shallow, slow moving, swampy river that birds and fish loved in its natural state.
The ebb and flow in a river like the Missouri provides the basis for life itself.
Reporter:
But the Missouri is no longer wild, tamed by dams and dredging.
Now a shipping highway the government says endangers the very existence of three critical river species -- the 100 million-year-old Pallid Sturgeon, the shore-wading the Least Tern.
The Missouri's natural rhythm destroyed, say the experts, by six dams in a system from north central Montana to the Mississippi River.
A transformation turning the meandering river into essentially a deep water ditch.
Without providing the higher flow in the spring and the lower flow in the summer that Missouri river species are adapted to, they're going to disappear.
Today's sturgeon can't reproduce in the river any more, only in man-made hatcheries and sand bars, homes to wading birds are being washed away by deep water.
So to save fish and birds and improve recreational use in up-river states, where tourism is a major source of income, the government wants to alter 50 years of steady water flow.
Re-creating the original river by releasing more water in spring, less in summer -- fighting words for downriver farmers and barge operators.
Try explaining that times have changed, nonsense to the people who live along the Missouri river and don't want to go back to the spring floods.
Reporter:
It's about the water and who controls it.
The Missouri, second longest river in the country.
7 states, 2,500 miles long and now according to conservationists, second on the list of rivers in danger.
Farmers say it's the planting season that's in danger if the Missouri isn't controlled in spring.
And barge owners say two dry months in the summer will ruin business.
What this proposal does is double the cost of operation on the Missouri river and will cause those companies to move off the river.
Reporter:
But according to figures from the U.S. Corps of Army Engineers, the four grain producing states along the Missouri, producing nearly 5 billion bushels of grain each year, ship very little by barge now.
16.7 million bushels.
That's .3%.
The barge companies do not own the Missouri river.
The flood plain farmers do not own the Missouri river.
Everybody owns it.
We have to find a way to share the Missouri.
Reporter:
And say environmentalists save three threatened  species and a leisure economy dependent upon a wide, untamed Missouri.
Jim Avila, NBC news, Bismarck, North Dakota.
Grief engulfed Austria, one day after a fire in a cable car filled with skiers killed at least 155 people.
It happened inside a tunnel high in the Austrian Alps.
Here's NBC's Ron Allen.
As helicopters carried emergency crews to the scene of the disaster nearly 100 Americans headed home to military bases in Germany, without eight members of their ski clubs who never came back.
Major Drew Stathis and his 8-year-old daughter say they might have been trapped, but they were just five minutes behind the group.
In the Army you kind of expect, prepare yourself.
But not on a family vacation.
That's where the tragedy is.
Lieutenant Mike Coe got tired of waiting for a train and left a family of four Americans who died, standing in line.
It is horrifying what happened to them.
And it is horrifying how close I was to -- I mean, I guess I'm a good, impatient American who did not want to wait in line.
Today this Alpine resort town came to an abrupt halt as more than 150 victims were all but positively identified.
Friends and relatives who'd been waiting and hoping were taken to a private memorial service.
Up the mountain the usually packed ski areas were completely deserted.
Investigators still haven't figured out what caused this disaster.
Several eyewitnesses have told them they saw flames coming from the train as it headed up the mountain, before it entered the tunnel.
One official here said, by the time the driver noticed the fire, it already was too late.
The main concern now is to remove and identify the victims.
These Americans ended a holiday weekend burdened by a deep sense of loss.
Nobody is looking forward to the long bus ride with our friends missing.
It's going to be hard.
Hard for this entire nation mourning the worst disaster here that anyone can remember.
Ron Allen, NBC News, Kaprun, Austria.
It's now been almost two months since the worst terror attack on a U.S. Navy ship, the destroyer "Cole," and tonight, sources tell NBC News that an American Muslim militant, a prime suspect in planning the attack, is now in custody in Jordan.
His name is Jaed Hijazi, and NBC News has learned he's got direct high-level ties to the terrorist Osama bin Laden.
He's reportedly told U.S. investigators of additional plans, to attack U.S. military aircraft in the Persian Gulf and Middle East.
I can't for the life of me figure out why anyone would invest in the airline industry.
Please, someone tell me a group companies facing more serious problems than the legacy airline carriers (Delta, US Airways, Continental, American, Northwestern, United).
High fuel costs, insane pension obligations, and a highly paid, specialized workforce.
To this list of woes, we add a whole slew of competitors with much lower cost structures.
I admit I've already taken advantage of the lower fares announced last week to book a business trip but these next few years are not going to be pretty for some of these companies.
Unfortunately, the pain is not limited to these companies.
Pittsburgh, one of US Airway's hubs, built up its airport complete with a sprawling retail complex in the terminal.
Now US Airways has reduced flights out of Pittsburgh by 28% since January of 2004 and is in real danger of folding completely.
These shiny new airports are usually financed by long-term bonds that still have to paid off.
..but not by the airlines.
This is an industry looking for a sustainable strategy.
Southwest and JetBlue were the only major airlines to earn a profit in 2004 but who knows what will be happening in another five years.
So I will thankfully accept the low fares, bemoan the loss of food on flights, and watch these companies parade in and out of bankruptcy.
BusinessWeek Online has some other commentary about the fare cuts here and about US Airway's woes here.
Thousands of people in Botswana have lined up to view the remains of an African man whose body was stuffed and exhibited in a Spanish museum for nearly a century.
The man was returned to Africa after complaints from the UN and other organizations that displaying his body was racist and offensive.
The man will be buried at a funeral service tomorrow.
You are listening to BBC news for The World.
I'm Gregor Craigy.
An apparent attack on a US warship has left at least six American sailors dead and about 35 injured.
The explosion came as the guided-missile destroyer USS Cole was refueling at a port in Yemen.
NPR's Chad Pergram reports.
Both the White House and the Pentagon said the attack appeared to be an act of terrorism.
President Clinton immediately whisked to the region investigative teams from the FBI, the Pentagon and the State Department.
The attack comes as US forces in the Middle East have been placed on a heightened state of alert after days of clashes between Israelis and Palestinians.
Defense Secretary William Cohen said the US would continue to protect its interests around the globe.
No one should doubt our resolve to remain a force for peace and for stability and no one should assume that they can force us to retreat.
No one should assume they can attack us with impunity.
The Cole had just arrived in the harbor for a refueling stop.
Officials say men aboard this small boat had been assisting the Cole with mooring lines just before the blast.
Chad Pergram ,NPR News, Washington.
The bodies of 2 more American sailors were recovered today from the USS Cole in the Yemeni port of Aden.
US officials are on the scene and continuing their investigations into the explosion that killed 17 crewmembers on board the Cole last Thursday.
Today there are reports that police in Aden questioned the landlord of an apartment where bomb-making equipment was found and whose occupants may have carried out the suicide attack against the warship.
Also today at the Cole's homeport in Norfolk, Virginia, President Clinton led a memorial service for those who died aboard the Cole.
The service began with the playing of the national anthem.
The President asked all Americans to take a moment to thank the men and women of the military.
Today we honor our finest young people, fallen soldiers who rose to freedom's challenge.
We mourn their loss, celebrate their lives, and offer the love and prayers of a grateful nation to their families.
Mr. Clinton mentioned the name of each of the 17 victims and praised the courage and character of the men and women who serve in the armed forces.
And he delivered this clear message for those who carry out attacks on members of US military.
For those who attacked them we say you will not found the safe harbor.
We will find you and justice will prevail.
America will not stop standing guard for peace, or freedom, or stability in the Middle East and around the world.
At the end of the somber ceremony, President Clinton asked everyone to join him in a moment of silence followed by the Navy Hymn and Taps.
Britain's going to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea.
Foreign Secretary Robin Cook made the announcement on his arrival in the South Korean capital, Seoul.
But Cook says establishing ties with North Korea doesn't mean London will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses in the country.
We have diplomatic relations around the world, we are going to find out who is a human rights breaker, we have very deep and very real concerns.
The advantage of having diplomatic relations is that we can have a direct dialogue in which we can raise these concerns and express our deep anxiety for the need of improvement in them.
Cook says the South Korean leadership is keen on international help in bringing its northern neighbor in from the cold.
Britain said today that it is normalizing relations with North Korea.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair called the decision a historic breakthrough.
It comes  just days ahead of Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's trip to the North Korean capital Pyongyang.
Britain's foreign minister Robin Cook, who made the announcement, said opening diplomatic links could help ease tensions between North and South Korea, technically the two countries are still at war.
Germany said today that it also plans to normalize relations with Pyongyang,
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation in Washington DC.
Mr. Harrison, Britain, Italy, prior to that Australia, the Philippines now and apparently Germany all bringing the most secretive state into the fold.
How about the United States, where does that leave us?
Well, I think President Clinton will get some good political cover.
From what Britain has done, if he goes to Pyongyang, as is now being discussed, Secretary Albright is going to go, the number two man in North Korea was in Washington last week.
Things are moving, what's particularly important is that Britain has not attached any conditions.
The United States has imposed a number of conditions on normalizing with North Korea.
The most important of them is that it renounce its missile program and its nuclear weapons program, or rather reach agreements on limiting and possibly ending them both, and as of now we are not in a position to normalize relations with North Korea just like that.
We will want negotiations on some of these contested issues.
Well let me ask you more about America's interest now and Britain's move, I mean how do you make sense of what's happening, especially if Britain was involved in a war with North Korea as obviously was the United States, and until recently North Korea was considered by the US a rogue nation.
It is still shrouded in secrecy, as we said, including in its nuclear weapons program.
Are you trusting of these newly forced alliances, do you consider what Britain is doing either reckless or ill advanced?
No.
And I don't think it is an alliance really, it is just conducting diplomatic interchange with them.
It is not even clear how soon Britain is going to have a mission in Pyongyang.
And so I think it certainly isn't reckless to establish diplomatic relations, and I think indeed it is a very healthy thing because the present leadership of Kim Jong Il, son of the late General You  , he has been trying to open up to the outside world.
He doesn't want to reform his internal economic system or political controls.
On the other hand he needs western capital, he needs supportive international agencies to deal with tremendous economic problems that North Korea has had since the end of the cold war, when they lost their Russian and Chinese economic subsidies.
So that trend of North Korea opening up to the outside, it seems to be, it should be encouraged.
So then as North Korea opens up more and more, what are the possible repercussions down the road for the nearly 40,000 American troops who remain in South Korea?
Well, North Korea's attitude has been that if the United States and North Korea are friends and the North Koreans don't feel threatened, they wont object to some US forces remaining in the Korean peninsula in a new role.
That is to say, if they are going to be there as allies of South Korea against North Korea, then the North Koreans don't want them there, they will keep putting on the pressure for the US to get the forces out.
The North Koreans are certainly not going to end their missile program, if the US continues to maintain some aspects of its military presence in the Korean peninsula such as its aircraft.
So I think they are going to ask for military concessions in order to do what we want them to do regarding missiles, but I think that the assumption that this improvement in ties between North and South and between North Korea and other countries is going to lead to the complete withdrawal of the US from Korea in the near future, certainly I don't think at all, are.
Mr. Harrison, thank you very much for speaking with us.
Thank you.
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation, speaking to us from Washington DC.
Missouri residents remembered Governor Mel Carnahan today.
He died Monday night in a plane crash while campaigning for the Senate.
Thousands attended a ceremony at the Missouri State capital.
President and Mrs. Clinton were among the mourners.
A former US Army sergeant has pleaded guilty in New York to conspiracy in the bombings of American Embassies in east Africa in 1998.
Ali Mohammed, a native of Egypt, has admitted to five charges of conspiring with a Saudi born dissident Osama bin Laden to attack US targets in the Middle-East.
More than 220 people died in the blasts.
Libyan leader Colonel Gadaffi can be prosecuted in France over the bombing of a French airliner in which a 170 people were killed.
That's the ruling of a court in Paris.
It rejected an appeal that as a serving head of state Gadaffi should be immune from prosecution.
The lawyer representing the victims' families Francoise Rudetski is hailing the decision as a victory.
The victory today is that any people who committed an act of terrorism should know that he can be pursued and could be arrested and there is no immunity for anyone, any leaders in the world.
Relatives of those killed after an explosion on board the plane over Niger in 1989, brought the case against the Libyan leader.
Six Libyans including Colonel Gadaffi's brother-in-law have already been tried in their absence.
This is The World.
I am Lisa Mullins.
Putting aside a half century of acrimony, Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright met today with North Korea's leader Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang.
Part of the purpose of this historic visit is to lay the groundwork for a possible trip to North Korea by President Clinton before his term ends.
Albright's visit to Pyongyang is the first by a high level US official since the communist state was established in 1948.
Kong Dan Oh is a Korean expert who has just written a book called 'North Korea through the Looking Glass'.
She is now in the South Korean capital of Seoul.
We know that the visit is making big news there in Seoul.
Can you tell us what is being reported about the meeting between the two sides from the South Korean perspective?
Well, when I look at about six major daily newspapers, basically the top news was Madeleine Albright meeting with the Chairman Kim Jong Il.
And basically that indeed this is a very historic event, and some kind of euphoria and very positive upbeat feeling.
But at the same time, the reports are basically telling the importance of this meeting that is that they have to talk about the very critical security matter issues such as missile and nuke.
But nonetheless, the meeting was very crucial, so I think all in all, it was a very positive beginning.
And how much of South Korea as you mentioned is bordering on euphoria, get this new relationship with Pyongyang and at the visit by Secretary of State Albright?
I know that you have taken a more cautious approach, and I wonder if that applies to Secretary Albright's visit in general?
Do you believe that the US is doing the right thing?
Or is perhaps the United States, in your view, moving too quickly to try and patch things up?
I am kind of taking a slightly cautious approach, simply because if Madam Albright is there, without the really thinking down the road some kind of strategic consequences of this meeting, simply because we are interested in seeing this gentleman and maybe before our term is over, let me meet you.
I think that kind of simple approach to be wrong.
But if she understands importance of this meeting and further brings up substance of issue to be resolved between the North Korea and the United States, I think that is very desirable.
What you're saying is that you feel that the part of the impetus of the North is influenced by the fact that the United States has a presidential election just a couple of weeks away.
I think that is a definitely correct statement, provided that maybe the Republican candidate, Mr. Bush to be elected.
North Korea was very, very scared that Mr. Bush would take a much more hawkish and conservative approach.
So before this Clinton administration comes to be over, they would like to lay down the ground rules and kind of create some kind of positive improvement to deal with the United States.
And obviously one of the most important agendas for tomorrow is to discuss the possibilities of President Clinton's next visit sometime in November.
I know that you have concerns about how a potential visit by President Clinton might be portrayed within North Korea itself.
Why is that a concern of yours?
My fundamental belief is that Kim Jong Il has not really made his mind or made a decision to push the reforms, even in the session of 1978 Chinese reform that was taken by Deng Xiaoping.
He is now gambling, he is trying, but he has not really changed his manner or his policy whatsoever.
His economy and his society's politics is really getting in real deep trouble.
He has to show his power and he's been telling his people that I am the true leader and the world is afraid of us.
All the imperialist capitalist is afraid of us.
That we are the center of the universe.
Without the North Korea, the globe is not existing.
Let me show you that I am the true leader and they will come to our country to pay visit, courtesy visit for me.
And so now Putin visited, President Kim visited, Jiang Zemin will visit next year and the President Clinton will go.
Domestic consumption of this visit will be immense, without changing any policy toward the freedom of proliferation  .
Is it really possible with the kind of close watch that the outside world is now going to be invited to give to North Korea, that Kim Jong Il could actually not change a thing in terms of his policies, internally or externally?
I am exactly wondering like you, and I think that there is a maybe the possibility actually is going up.
So I don't object really any of these like U.K. normalization, you know.
I don't have any objection.
But only when the leaders and the elite, the policy elite, is aware of that what they are bringing and what they are negotiating and how they would like to have an impact on North Korean society, I think that's the important key question.
Kong Dan Oh is the author of the book 'North Korea through the Looking Glass', speaking to us from Seoul, South Korea.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World service, PRI and WGBH in Boston.
I'm Lisa Mullins.
American spy suspect Edmund Pope took the stand again today in a Moscow courtroom.
The former naval intelligence officer faces charges of stealing secret designs for a high-speed Russian torpedo system.
Pope denies acting illegally and President Clinton and Secretary Of State Madeleine Albright have called for his release on health grounds but Russian prosecutors are pressing ahead as The World's Nenad Sebek reports from Moscow.
The trial was suspended earlier in the week because of Pope's poor health.
Pope has a history of bone cancer but a doctor working for the FSB, the Russian security service, pronounced Pope fit enough to stand trial today.
The proceedings are held behind closed doors and Pope's lawyer said today that his client is still very weak and that he wants a new interpreter, says the current one works for the same agency that has charged Pope.
The lawyer Pavel Astakhov says his client is innocent when it comes to espionage.
The whole case as Astakhov claims is an exercise in politics.
This is the first time in almost 40 years that a foreign national is being tried for espionage.
It's quite blatant.
Officials from the security force, which used to be the KGB, are openly boasting about taking an American citizen to court.
Way back in 1961 US military pilot Garry Powers was tried and sentenced but later on exchanged for a captured Soviet spy.
But Powers was caught red-handed.
His U2 spy plane was brought down by Soviet Air Defenses.
Pope was arrested as he was trying to purchase blue prints for what he says is a 10-year-old underwater propulsion system or as the prosecutions claims ultra modern, secret Russian torpedoes.
Former Russian Army Intelligence Officer, Vitaly Schlykov says Pope could easily have been a victim of the Russian obsession with secrets.
We have of course a secrecy culture in this country for decades and decades and reminisce of it are coming to the surface in this case.
The laws on secrecy are still intact from the times of the Soviet Union.
Guilty or not, Pope is being held under a very harsh regime in the Moscow Lefortovo prison where his wife Sherry visited him last week.
We took two pictures of our grandson and they won't let him keep the pictures and I took a coat and gloves and they wouldn't let him have those, but we did get to embrace and we did get to talk about our family for one hour.
Prison rules say that an inmate can only receive approved gifts on the first and third Thursday in a month.
And Sherry Pope's short-term visa didn't enable her to stay that long.
She says she even appealed to the Russian President.
Ed's mother and I both wrote letters to President to ask him to please take into consideration that Ed is 54 years old and that we want him home.
Military intelligence analyst Vitaly Schlykov says Putin is probably caught between a rock and a hard place when it comes to the American's trail.
I'm sure that it came unexpected for Putin.
He wouldn't have approved on a case like this because politically it is very harmful but he came from the ranks of the FSB himself.
He has to pretend that he is sticking to his guns in this case.
In Schlykov's opinion, Pope is likely to get convicted.
But he believes that immediately after the sentencing Pope is likely to be pardoned by Moscow.
US Congressman John Peterson, who has been championing Pope's cause, says he fears that might be too late for Pope.
The main thing we have been pushing for months is health care.
Earlier we had asked for an American doctor to see him.
When they continued to say no then we found Russian doctors.
The judge delayed the trial for a day and a half so we could furnish her with a list of doctors and hospitals in Moscow and after we provided that information she said no.
Pope's lawyer Pavel Astakhov says that what the authorities here call medical care is a joke.
In Pope's case medical control means everyday testing for his suspected cancer.
What they do here is take his blood pressure and temperature.
The very least they could do is take blood tests and bone marrow tests.
The court has even rejected our demand for medical expertise to establish whether he is fit to stand trial.
As Strakovs says he does not trust the Judge Nina Barkova at all.
He says she has rejected almost every one of his 40 objections and suggestions during the trail so far.
Strakovs is now trying to arrange for fresh witnesses for his defense of Edmund Pope, but is not hopeful that even that will be granted by the court.
For The World, this is Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
In Moscow, today there was a dramatic plot twist in a real life courtroom drama.
A lawyer for US spy suspect, Edmond Pope said that the main prosecution witness has retracted his testimony.
According to Pope's attorney the witness said he provided the evidence under pressure from the Russian Secret Service.
Ever since Pope was arrested 7 months ago, the American businessmen has denied charges that he was gathering secret information on a new high-speed Russian torpedo.
The World's Nenad Sebek is following the trial in Moscow.
Nenad, go back and tell us just how we got here?
Who is Edwin Pope and why is he on trial in Russia?
Well, Edwin Pope is a retired American intelligence officer and that's sort of speaks against him when it comes to the Russian public and certainly the Russian court.
He has claimed that he is now just an innocent businessman, who was dealing with the Russian businesses orbit in the Defense Industry.
He has, however, claimed that he is only dealing with the de-classified military material and that when it comes to these torpedoes that we are talking about, that he was buying an underwater propulsion system, which is 10-years old.
What the Russian prosecution is claiming is that Pope was actually after ultramodern secret high-speed Russian torpedoes.
Okay, so tell us what happened in the trial this morning and bring in this professor from one of Moscow's elite universities who is a key witness?
The big news of today was that Pope's attorney distributed to journalists this morning a letter, which he says was written by Anatoly Babkin, who is a Professor at Moscow's Bauman Technical Institute, who until now was considered to be the main witness for the prosecution.
He says that he gave that evidence under pressure having had a grave heart condition proceeding a heart attack.
Professor Babkin says that he never actually met Edwin Pope face to face, nor has he given him any kind of sensitive information, therefore, his former testimony is to be considered as not corresponding to reality says this letter by Professor Babkin.
However, the court today again, this is what we were told by Pope's lawyer, has decided not to accept this change in testimony.
The court said that Professor Babkin had ample opportunities to appear in the court.
What is not clear at this moment is that whether it will allow a personal appearance by Professor Babkin, in which he could sort of say what he said in this letter.
Then I would assume that the Professor is still ailing.
I mean, is he able to take the stand, is there any indication that he will be asked to?
No he is not able to take the stand at the moment.
He is recuperating after a heart attack, but Pope's lawyer has said that court session could actually take place in the apartment of Professor Babkin.
We still have to wait and see whether the court will accept that.
So how important is this evidence?
I mean how pivotal a figure is he?
Is he providing evidence of no one else can?
Well.
From what we have heard so far, this is supposed to be like a key witness, a very important witness, but then the first reaction came from the FSB, the Federal Security Bureau, which is the former KGB, they are the ones who are prosecuting Pope.
Their spokesman said today that their evidence is far from being based only on Babkin's testimony.
He said that FSB has evidence given by other witnesses and experts, as well as, written documents and videos.
This is not, what would know as a standards of American style trial certainly, first of all of the proceedings are conducted entirely in secret.
What is the defense attorney for Edmond Pope saying about the conduct in the trial?
Well.
He is very unhappy with the main judge.
Pope is not being tried by Jury.
He has been tried by panel of judges headed by judge Nina Barkova and what we have heard from the defense attorney Pavel Astakhov is that she has rejected almost every single one of over 40 objections and suggestions that he has so far submitted during the case.
He is very unhappy with the way she has been conducting the whole case and also with the fact that she has denied Edmund Pope the proper medical attention that he has asked for.
And what has like that it happened should Edmond Pope get convicted.
Would he actually serve time?
Well.
Most of the people I have spoken here believe that that would not be the case, that since the case is already being brought to court that he is most likely to get convicted, but will then afterwards be pardoned either by the president or the parliament, and then sent back home for reasons of ill health, but most people here do expect a conviction at the end of this trial.
It was Nenad Sebek in Moscow talking to us about the espionage trial in Moscow of American Edmond Pope.
Thank you very much Nenad.
You are welcome Lisa.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
A court in Moscow has convicted American businessman Edmund Pope of spying and sentenced him to 20 years in prison.
Pope, a retired naval officer from Pennsylvania, was accused of illegally obtaining secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
He argued throughout the case that the information he obtained was already available to the public.
The White House denounced the court action calling it unjustified and wrong.
Pope's wife and his lawyers have also called for his release on health grounds, saying that he suffers from a rare form of bone cancer, which may have returned during his eight months in a Russian prison.
Corey Flintoff, NPR News, Washington.
A court in Moscow today sentenced American businessman Edmund Pope to 20 years in jail.
Pope, a former naval officer, was found guilty of collecting secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and he had a powerful ally.
President Clinton had appealed for clemency for Pope on health grounds and had brought the case up with Russian President Vladimir Putin, but Mr. Clinton's pleas apparently fell on deaf ears.
The Russian court today handed down the maximum sentence.
Still, The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow says that Pope has not yet exhausted his legal options.
He has got 7 days to appeal this particular sentence.
There is also the possibility of asking for a presidential pardon, Pope has actually indeed already done that.
It's just that his wife said that she has not heard neither from the President nor his office.
His health is a big issue as well, isn't it?
Yes, Pope has been suffering from a rare bone cancer in the past and he has been consistently complaining about his health ever since last Spring when he was taken in to the Lefortovo prison.
The thing is that he has not been allowed any access to American doctors and even to Russian doctors of his own choosing.
He has been examined by the Russian doctors in the Lefortovo prison but they have just said that his complaints are unfounded and that it might be a case of severe rheumatism or something like that.
They are not sort of allowing the possibility of his bone cancer reoccurring.
One of the things that has been said here is that Mr. Pope may have run afoul of a changing mood in Russia about what kind of military and security information might be made available to the west for business purposes.
That his intentions were innocent to begin with, but the times changed and what he did began to look more and more like espionage.
That is certainly a possibility but we don't know actually precisely because we don't even know what the initial charges are.
The whole trial was held behind closed doors and the details of the accusations against Pope have never been fully released.
We know that the prosecution claimed that he was trying to purchase secret plans for a top-secret high-speed Russian torpedo.
He was claiming all the time, and his lawyer was saying that he was sort of trying to purchase plans that had been actually out in the open but we do not know the precise legals of that.
That is one of the possibilities.
Another thing which is mentioned here is that Pope simply ran afoul of a new trend in Russia which was a trend where the security services were getting the upper hand where they were trying to prove that they are actually doing their job, that they are catching spies, that they are getting convictions.
We have, for example, today's reaction by General Alexander Zdanovich, he is the head of the FSB support programs.
He was very, very brief in his comments after the sentencing.
He said that the court has said that FSB investigators have acted correctly and in accordance with the law and he says, "Russia has its secrets, we will do our best to protect them".
Maybe Pope simply ran afoul of such attempts by the Russian Security Services to show that they are doing their job.
Putin, on the one hand, is certainly trying to show that he is in charge and that no one from the outside is going to get away with anything.
By the same token though he is not eager to run afoul of the United States and the State Department is very upset.
Is there any possibility that Mr. Putin might consider a pardon?
I would say there is a very strong possibility of that.
We know that President Clinton has spoken to Vladimir Putin about this when they met last time, and certainly the Secretary of State Madeleine Albright has brought up the issue a number of times, as has the State Department indeed with the Russian Foreign Ministry.
In a curious way the sentencing of Edmund Pope might be the beginning of an end of this ordeal for him.
Because now that there is a sentence, once the judiciary process is started, once the FSB brought him to trial everybody here expected that the trial will end and that it will end with a conviction.
But now that this judicial process is over there is a very, very strong likelihood, that's the feeling here in Moscow that President Vladimir Putin might pardon Edmund Pope.
There is a good reason for that, his ill health.
So it would be a nice humanitarian gesture and a way of offering a friendly hand to the west and to the United States in particular.
The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
Thanks a lot, Nenad.
You are welcome.
The United States is hoping that Russia's President Vladimir Putin will follow the advice of his special commission and pardon Edmund Pope.
This week the American businessman began serving a 20-year prison sentence in Moscow after being convicted of spying.
Specifically Russian prosecutors charged that Pope had stolen secrets relating to a high-speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and Washington backed him up.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha, did the Presidential Pardons Commission give any reason for their decision?
It gave several reasons.
I am not sure if those were the formal reasons but members of the commission have been interviewed today by various outlets and they say that they were afraid of the spy mania rising in Russia, that they thought it was really suspicious to them that Edmund Pope was sentenced to the maximum term, whereas the article of the law had 10 to 20 years.
He was sentenced to 20, even though according to the members of the Pardon Commission, the evidence that was presented by the prosecution was far from quotient.
They also said this court did not give the lawyers for the defense due procedure.
The court listened to the defense much less than it did to the prosecution.
Much of this sounds less like a pardon and more like a criticism of the number of institutions that Mr. Putin also has to show some support of,  including his court system and his police and his prosecutors.
How is he going to respond to this and when?
I don't think anybody knows and I don't think anybody will know until President Putin has responded.
It is his decision.
According to the Russian law the Pardon Commission, after it has made its decision, sends it to the President and it's up to him whether to endorse it or not to say no.
One last question for you, Marsha.
He does have a lot to balance doesn't he, President Putin?
Not only the institutions I mentioned but the need to keep things somehow free of tension.
Is this case likely to strain US-Russian relations?
I'm afraid it might.
Recently the Russian policy toward the US has fallen into a line where Russia tries to demonstrate force it once had but no longer does.
It wants to put an end to what is regarded by the current Russian government as humiliation of the past years.
There were numerous attempts to be a source of minor troubles even though Russia can no longer be a source of scare to the west and among such instances there were several, there was just recently flying over by Russian military planes over Kitty Hawk, an American warship.
There is also a scandal that erupted over Russia's declaration that it will sell weapons to Iran, contrary to the earlier made agreement.
Such examples are quite a few already, some of them are combined with material profits for Russia but not necessarily.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of the Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha,  thank you very much for speaking with us.
Pleasure.
Edmund Pope tasted freedom today for the first time in more than eight months.
Pope is the American businessman who was convicted last week on spying charges and sentenced to 20 years in a Russian prison.
He denied any wrongdoing.
Russian President Vladimir Putin pardoned him for health reasons.
Pope was flown to the U.S. military base at Ramstein, Germany.
He will spend the next several days at the medical center there before he returns home with his wife Sherry.
Pope was in remission from a rare form of bone cancer when he was arrested in Russia.
Doctors will examine him for signs that the cancer may have come back while he awaiting trial in a Russian jail.
A spokeswoman said that Pope was suffering from malnutrition and high blood pressure.
Congratulations from foreign leaders poured into the governor's mansion in Texas today.
The messages were addressed to President-elect George W. Bush and they all contained words of welcome and optimism.
But truth be told for most international figures, Bush is something of an unknown.
He has traveled little and his diplomatic experience is limited to contacts with Mexican officials during his tenure as governor.
The World's Jeb Sharp has been hunting down clues to the foreign policy of the incoming administration.
A few broad foreign policy themes emerged during the campaign.
Chief among them are debate over the wisdom of US intervention.
Bush clearly favors limiting the use of American force and troops to solve conflicts overseas.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says that view is consistent with the philosophies of two top Bush advisors, Russia expert Condoleezza Rice and retired General Colin Powell.
Certainly, Condoleezza Rice, certainly Colin Powell who I expect, the two of them to be the dominant force in the next administration on foreign policy.
I certainly think they believe they would like to not intervene as much as the Clinton administration or I guess the previous Bush administration did.
In fact, Condoleezza Rice who is slated to become Bush's National Security Advisor has already said she'd like to see US troops pulled home from the Balkans.
But, Robert Kagan says its one thing for Bush's advisors to state a philosophy, its quite another to implement it.
I think they may find the world has a way of intruding itself and that it won't be that easy to pull forces out of the Balkans for instance, without destroying the NATO alliance.
After Rice made some comments about having a new division of labor, I think that was the word she used with regard to NATO and peacekeeping issues, there was a riot in Europe and the real fears that the United States was getting ready to withdraw from the continent and I think they had to walk that back a little bit.
The Balkans is just one example where the Bush administration will have to walk a fine line in delineating a different approach from that of Mr. Clinton.
The foreign policy challenges facing the next President are daunting.
The Mid East peace process is on hold with Israelis and Palestinians practically at war.
The sanctions regime against Iraq has unraveled.
Russia and China are alarmed at the prospect of America beefing up its missile defenses.
India and Pakistan, now nuclear powers are locked in a dangerous standoff.
Stability in East Asia is another pressing concern.
But despite the challenges, Northeast Asia expert Bates Gil of the Brookings Institution is encouraged by what he knows of the Bush foreign team.
One of the most interesting aspects of the new likely team under the Bush administration is first of all, extensive experience in defense and military affairs.
Secondly, it's easy to point to a number of persons who will have leading positions who have had extensive experience in East Asian affairs.
So you have a combination of depth of experience plus an understanding of the region.
Both of which will come in handy if there is a crisis with China over Taiwan or relations with North Korea deteriorate.
In such a crisis, Bush is likely to rely on the advice of government officials who cut their teeth during the cold war.
Some critics like Gore advisor Bruce Jentelson worry that the Bush team will be out of step with today's issues.
Issues related to globalization, global public health, technology, and those challenges.
Yet in my view a truly realistic policy cannot be based only on the old agenda issues, really has to address these new agenda issues as well.
But no matter what sort of expertise Bush's international affairs people bring to the White House, they won't be able to fully control what happens on their watch.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says each President's foreign policy is ultimately shaped by events, not theories.
Really, most of a President's foreign policy comes down to how they respond to specific events.
Bill Clinton did not come in to office intending to send troops to Haiti and the Balkans, and events sort of forced his hand and I think that, you know, the truth is Bush administration comes in with certain kinds of prejudices, but we will have to see how they respond to crises.
And the only thing that I'm confident of is that there will be crises.
President-elect Bush is expected to begin naming his top cabinet picks in the next few days.
Those choices will mean everything when the first crisis rolls around.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
In 1998, the United States voted against the creation of the World's first permanent International War Crimes Court.
President Clinton still has a chance to sign the treaty creating the Court before a final deadline this Sunday.
Advocates are pressing him to do just that, but Conservatives in Congress and Pentagon officials don't want the US to join the treaty.
The World's Jeb Sharp explains why.
Jesse Helms, the Conservative and powerful Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has made it clear the Rome's statuette would be dead on arrival if it were brought to Congress for ratification.
But proponents of the permanent International Criminal Court would still like to see President Clinton at least sign the treaty before the New Year's eve deadline.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Clinton's signature would be an important symbolic gesture.
What he will accomplish is making a clear statement that the United States not only in the former Yugoslavia, not only in Rwanda, not only in Cambodia, not only in Sierra Leone, where the administration has supported efforts at justice, but worldwide the United States supports the rule of law and supports holding those accused of genocide to account under the highest standards of due process.
But the opposition here in the United States is intense.
It comes mainly from the Pentagon where US military officials fear the Court will leave Americans vulnerable to politically motivated prosecutions.
Negotiators have tried to include safeguards in the treaty to address those fears, but stop short of exempting US personnel from prosecution.
John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute shares the Pentagon's objections.
I think there is every prospect such a court and its prosecutor would be highly politicized and the principal target of a court like this might well turn out to be the United States or Israel or other countries like that.
Bolton says that almost happened at the War Crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague, when Chief Prosecutor Carla Delponte briefly contemplated an investigation of NATO's bombing campaign against Serbia in 1999.
But proponents of the court say it's healthy for the United States and its allies to come under the same scrutiny as other countries.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Delponte's handling of the NATO case was exemplary.
Carla Delponte was acting as any responsible prosecutor must when she receives credible allegations of wrongdoing.
She looked into those allegations and then after an appropriate investigation she dismissed them.
Richard Dicker says President Clinton should keep the promise he made to the Rwandan people in 1998 when he told survivors of the genocide there the United States would support the International Court.
But John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute says a Clinton signature in the face of stiff domestic opposition would be meaningless.
I think it's a symbolic act that doesn't achieve much, but I don't think anybody internationally should think that whatever President Clinton does will have the slightest impact on the next administration.
Despite American objections, the International Criminal Court enjoys wide support worldwide and among major US allies.
131 countries have signed the treaty, 7 today and 25 have ratified it.
60 nations in all must ratify the treaty for the International Criminal Court to come into existence.
That's expected to happen, with or without US support, in 2002.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
Got job?
And so, I have rejoined the world of the fully employed.
After Christmas, I got a call from the wife of one of my former bosses (at my last full-time job).
She was looking for a Development Assistant at the retirement community where she works.
I started here 4 weeks ago.
WM is affiliated with, but not run or fully supported by, the denomination I've been a part of all my life (UMC).
My grandmother (who was Baptist) lived here for a few months before she died in 1995, so I have many connections to the job.
Our offices are in one of the patio homes, and I have my own lovely office with a window.
The job's only about 12 miles from home, and I'm going against the bulk of the traffic mornings and afternoons.
It all seems perfect and yet.
.. Oh, I'm so thankful to be somewhere so nice where I might actually make a difference in people's lives, and I want to keep an open mind and hope it'll last forever, but I have a feeling I'll be restless within a year or so.
My boss is a very nice person, but conservative and resistant to technology, i.e. computers, internet, etc.
We just got new computers a week and half ago, and she's griping about XP (her old OS was Windows 98--mine was 95, so I'm thrilled with the new stuff).
I tell her it'll just take some getting used to.
We'll see.
I'm not making the kind of salary I was hoping to get, but it's the best salary I've gotten thus far.
When I was fulltime in radio I made a little less, but I got quite a few remotes, which make up for not getting a topnotch salary.
I'm still doing my TV announcing and my weekend radio stuff, so that money will help.
I'm going to start actively pursuing more voice work in the next month or so, too.
My plan is to pay off my car early, and then work on the other debts.
I think it's time to go on and fill out the adoption applications.
I'm terrified of more debt, but Mom and Dad will help with the money.
I'm not sure they realize how expensive it all is.
I'm thinking we might lean toward adopting from Guatemala, but we've still not hashed it all out.
It's almost bad making some money now, because while most of me wants to save as much as possible, the other, smaller part is screaming loudly for stuff, stuff, stuff!!!
I've got a trial subscription to XM at work because of the Dell computers, and now I'm lusting to have it all of the time.
G got me a nice office stereo for my birthday and it does have an aux jack, so I could listen to it here.
He asked if I wanted a car stereo, and I said no, but I do.
There are so many things I want.
A garage.
A dining room set.
New stuff for our house.
New clothes.
New everything.
But I want family more.
I think part of the draw of the other stuff is I could get it now.
But I'd be paying for it later.
Money makes the world go round and round and round til I'm just dizzy.
A Moscow court has denied a request by US spy suspect Edmond Pope for a medical examination, despite his rare bone cancer.
Mr. Pope's condition has gone untreated since he was jailed five months ago.
Russia accuses the former US naval intelligence officer of illegally obtaining secrets about a high-tech Russian torpedo.
On Friday the court denied a series of defense motions that also included a request to tape the proceedings and replace the court translator, who works for Russian security.
The trial opened Wednesday and has been suspended until Monday.
Ivory Coast's army has pledged its loyalty to opposition candidate Loran Gbagbo.
The pledge followed a tumultuous 24 hours that ended the rule of the junta, which seized power last December.
Soldiers and civilians took to the streets to celebrate the departure of junta leader General Robert Guei.
In an address on state television, Wednesday, Mr. Gbagbo, leader of the Ivorian Socialist party, said he would be forming a cabinet shortly.
A Russian scientist has told a Moscow City court that the information an American businessman allegedly tried to purchase about a Russian torpedo is commonly available and not a state secret.
The scientist, an expert on the torpedo and a defense witness at the trial of businessman Edmond Pope said he had often used the torpedo information for his research and had spoken openly about it.
A defense lawyer said the testimony would help his client.
In Yemen, a bomb threat has forced the tightening of security at the hotel housing US investigators probing the attack on the USS Cole.
Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon told reporters the situation caused the Secretary of Defense to call US field commanders.
The Secretary held a video conference call with all the commanders in chiefs, as well as the service chiefs and the service secretaries and the topic was force protection.
The hotel has been hosting scores of investigators who are looking into the apparent suicide bomb attack on the navy destroyer that killed 17 US sailor two weeks ago.
The US Navy destroyer damaged apparently by a terrorist bomb while refueling at the Red Sea port Aden has begun its journey back to the States for repair.
As Dave Gavlak reports, the USS Cole was towed out of the Aden harbor to awaiting Norwegian transport ship, that will actually carry the damaged destroyer home.
The American national anthem played as four tug boats pulled the USS Cole slowly out of Yemen's Southern port of Aden.
The Cole was badly damaged two weeks ago in an apparent suicide bombing that killed 17 US sailors.
Security was tight as the ship was towed out.
American and Yemeni patrol boats mounted with machine guns escorted the Cole out to open waters while American helicopters flew overhead.
Some Yemenis expressed relief to see the ship leave.
Many locals said they feared the bombing of the ship would serve as an excuse for continued US military presence in the Gulf country.
Diplomats and analysts have commented that a joint investigation into the attack may in fact strengthen ties between the world super power and the poor, but strategic Arab state.
US and Yemeni officials say they believe Islamic militants may have carried out the bombing.
So far two little known Islamic groups have claimed responsibility for the attack.
Yemeni authorities claimed they have detained over 70 people for questioning.
These include some Afghan-Arab volunteers who came to Yemen after fighting against Soviet forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Dave Gavlak for VOA News, Cairo.
And this is VOA News now.
I'm Tom Crosby.
As we have been reporting, the White House confirms Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat are going to meet separately with President Clinton later this week.
Meanwhile, there has been continued trouble in the streets of West Bank and the Gaza Strip with at least two more Palestinians killed, Sunday in clashes with Israeli troops.
Laurie Kassman reports the trouble came despite an impassioned plea from Prime Minister Barak that Mr. Arafat rein in the rioters and return to the negotiating table.
On Saturday, Palestinians reported more than 30 injuries.
But reports of the fighting also talked of a drop in the level of violence, since both sides agreed to a cease-fire late Wednesday night.
More than 170 Palestinians have died and more than 6000 are reported to have been wounded in clashes with the Israeli military.
Several Israeli soldiers and civilians have also been killed.
Shopkeepers in East Jerusalem are being urged to close their doors to protest against the killing of two Palestinian teenagers on Friday, Southeast of Jerusalem.
Both Arab and Israeli businesses are suffering from the latest violence.
A shopkeeper in the Arab town of Jaffa, which is adjacent to Tel Aviv, complains that few Israelis venture into the area since clashes erupted there a few weeks ago.
Jaffa is usually bustling with Israeli and foreign tourists.
All our work is dependent totally on the Jews.
If they are not coming, so really we cannot work.
I mean, what happens that the Arabs here, the 20,000 Arabs in is dependent on the Jews going to their market and the Jews coming here.
So we cannot live, I mean, we are really totally paralyzed right now.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat have agreed to meet separately with US President Bill Clinton to see how to ease tensions and get the peace process back on track.
The meetings will take place later in the week after the US presidential vote on Tuesday.
Laurie Kassman, VOA News, Jerusalem.
US Defense Secretary William Cohen plans to travel next week to nine Middle Eastern Gulf states for meetings with regional leaders.
Mr. Cohen will depart next Tuesday to visit Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Israel, Jordan and Egypt.
The Pentagon says, the Secretary will consult with defense officials in those countries and also visit US troops in the area.
US forces in the Gulf have been on high alert, since last month's apparent terrorist bombing of the USS Cole, which killed 17 sailors.
An explosion struck the Cole, as it refueled in the Yemeni port of Aden.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair arrives in Russia today for talks with Vladimir Putin on security, foreign policy, and economic issues.
They are also expected to discuss a new Russian proposal for deep cuts in US and Russian long-range missiles.
VOA's Larry James in Moscow.
The highlight of the one-day visit will be three hours of talks on Tuesday, during which Mr. Blair and Mr. Putin will focus on a wide range of issues including Russia's latest call for cutting the number of strategic nuclear warheads to below 1500.
President Clinton has said such a deal is possible, but that it will be first necessary to convince Moscow of the merits of America's proposed Missile Defense System.
The US wants to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty so it can develop such a system.
Russia believes such a move could spark a new arms race and has threatened to tear up existing weapons agreements and stop disarmament talks if the United States goes ahead.
On Sunday Mr. Putin called on the Russian parliament to quickly ratify the amended Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty.
That treaty requires Russia to make further non-nuclear weapons reductions in some areas of the country including breakaway Chechnya.
President Putin acknowledged that Russia is still violating its commitment in Chechnya, but he said it is only a temporary situation which has the ultimate aim of cutting armaments in the region.
He also thanked the 29 other signatories to the treaty for their understanding.
He said Russia is fully behind the agreement that, he said, is an efficient instrument of ensuring security in Europe for years to come.
The original treaty was signed in 1990 and led to the destruction of thousands of heavy weapons by NATO and the former Warsaw Pact.
Tony Blair became the first western leader to come to Russia to meet the new President last March even before Mr. Putin was elected.
The Russian leader returned the favor by making London one of his first foreign destinations after taking office.
The two have already met four times this year.
Analysts here in Moscow believe Britain can play a useful role as a bridge to both Europe and the United States.
Trade is also expected to figure significantly in the talks.
Britain ranks as the third largest investor after the United States and Germany with just slightly more than $1 billion invested in Russia.
Larry James, VOA News, Moscow.
More than 50 people are dead in Nigeria, after a leaking oil pipeline burst into flames outside the commercial capital, Lagos.
The blast and resulting fire Thursday, ripped through an area near a fuel-loading depot owned by the state-run Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
Witnesses report seeing burnt bodies littering the charred grounds while many other victims are being treated for injuries sustained in the blaze.
A spokeswoman for the Petroleum Company says the fire was caused by vandals.
The Voice of America presents differing points of view on a wide variety of issues.
Next, an editorial expressing the policies of the United States government.
For nearly 20 years, the world has faced the challenge posed by AIDS.
Since 1988, the first day of December has been designated by the United Nations as World AIDS Day.
This is the time to disseminate information and faster cooperation in the battle against AIDS, the number one cause of infectious disease in the world.
The picture of the epidemic is bleak.
According to a new UN study, in the past year over five million people have been infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Since the beginning of the epidemic, about 22 million people have died of the disease.
While infections among adults are decreasing, infections among children are increasing.
Many of these cases are in sub-Saharan Africa where infected mothers are transmitting the virus to their babies during delivery.
Africa accounts for more than four-fifths of the world's AIDS-related deaths.
In some African countries, one out of four adults is infected with HIV.
But Eastern Europe has seen the biggest explosion of new infections.
In Russia, the rate of infection has more than doubled this year to 300,000.
South and Southeast Asia are other high-risk areas with five and three quarter million adults and children now living with HIV or AIDS.
In too many places, discussion of AIDS is taboo and the disease is shrouded in mystery and misinformation.
But as the grim statistics make clear, it is critical that the governments and citizens of those nations most affected by AIDS, do their part to recognize the scope of the epidemic and act decisively to confront it.
As President Bill Clinton said, we must work together to break the silence, to fight the stigmatization and protect the rights of those living with HIV and AIDS, and to help those infected find the care and treatment they need.
We must pledge to stay the course in our crusade until the world is finally freed from the shadow of this devastating epidemic.
Welcome to another hour of news and information on the Voice of America.
I'm David Chadwick, with VOA News now.
The death toll in Colombia from three days of heavy fighting between soldiers and rebels now stands at more than 100.
At least 54 soldiers and 50 guerillas have died in clashes around the northwestern cities of Bagado and Dabeiba.
Nearly all of the buildings, government buildings in those two cities, have been reportedly destroyed.
The clashes began Wednesday, when the rebel revolutionary armed forces of Colombia launched attacks on a number of northwestern towns.
An army helicopter went down close to the border with Panama, killing all 22 soldiers on board.
In South Asia, authorities in Bangladesh's Southwestern port of Mongla have called on the Army to control riots that have left at least four people dead and 58 injured.
Officials say the trouble began when striking dock workers tried to storm the port authority offices and police fired to disperse them.
The demonstrators are demanding that more people be hired to load and unload goods at the port.
Beginning early next year, visitors to Yosemite National Park in California will see some changes.
A new plan is aimed at protecting the giant Sequoia trees, scenic valleys, and waterfalls from the impact of four million tourists a year.
Under the new plan, visitors will have very limited access to the park by car.
The 343 million-dollar plan will create a new shuttle bus system to alleviate traffic congestion.
It will also remove roads from meadows, create more hiking trails, and restore campsites damaged by a 1997 flood.
Yosemite spokesman Scott Gediman says while these measures have been controversial, the preservation effort will not sacrifice visitor enjoyment.
And so we certainly do not want to limit access or will not limit access to the National Park, but we need to design the facilities, design parking areas, design the infrastructure in a way that we can handle these large amounts of people.
Yosemite is not alone in seeking new management strategies to preserve natural areas.
Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona is putting in a light rail system.
And Zion National Park in Utah has just established a new shuttle bus system.
With environment briefs, I'm Roseanne Skirble.
President Clinton has urged Russian President Vladimir Putin to order the release on humanitarian grounds of a US businessman convicted of spying.
A White House spokesman says the two leaders spoke by telephone today, after the Russian government's pardon commission recommended the release of Edmond Pope.
Earlier, a senior Russian official said Edmond Pope could be home by Christmas.
The former US naval intelligence officer was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison Wednesday, on charges he illegally obtained a classified information on a Russian torpedo.
Colombia's second largest Marxist rebel army has released forty-two soldiers and police officers.
Government officials say the National Liberation Army freed the captives today in Northern Colombia.
The forty-two prisoners were captured two years ago during clashes with the guerilla group.
Hardly a day passes without news photos of the police dragging limp protesters from some building or thoroughfare in one of our cities.
Of recent note are the activities of the pro- and anti-abortionists, anti-nuclear activists, animal rights protesters, college students concerned about racism, anti-apartheid groups, various self-styled "environmentalists" and those dissatisfied with the pace of the war against AIDS.
Maybe he didn't start it, but Mohandas Gandhi certainly provided a recognizable beginning to non-violent civil disobedience as we know it today.
The Mahatma, or "great souled one," instigated several campaigns of passive resistance against the British government in India.
Unfortunately, according to Webster's Biographical Dictionary, "His policies went beyond his control and resulted . . . in riots and disturbances" and later a renewed campaign of civil disobedience "resulted in rioting and a second imprisonment."
I am not a proponent of everything Gandhi did, but some of his law breaking was justified because India was then under occupation by a foreign power, and Indians were not able to participate fully in decisions that vitally affected them.
It is difficult, however, to justify civil disobedience, non-violent or not, where citizens have full recourse to the ballot box to effect change.
Where truly representative governments are safeguarded by constitutional protections of human rights and an independent judiciary to construe those rights, there is no excuse for breaking the law because some individual or group disagrees with it.
There may be a few cases where the law breaking is well pinpointed and so completely non-invasive of the rights of others that it is difficult to criticize it.
The case of Rosa Parks, the black woman who refused to sit at the back of the bus, comes to mind as an illustration.
But most cases of non-violent civil disobedience are not nearly so benign.
The public has a tendency to equate lawful demonstrations with non-violent civil disobedience.
It is true that both are non-violent, but there is a fundamental difference between them.
Lawful demonstrations, such as peaceful picketing and other assemblages that do not disturb the peace or cause a public nuisance or interfere with the rights of others, are rights guaranteed by any truly free system of government.
Civil disobedience, violent or non-violent, is intentional law breaking.
The subject of this discussion is non-violent civil disobedience; but, before we get on with that, let me make just a few tangential remarks about lawful demonstrations.
They are useful to call public attention to grievances, but they have little value in educating anyone about the issues in dispute.
The delight of television in dramatic confrontation encourages overuse of slogans chanted through bullhorns, militant gestures, accusatory signs and other emotionally inspired tactics.
Civilized discourse and an environment where compromise can begin are lost in a hostile posture abetted by superficial media interviews.
At best, demonstrations are overused and boringly uninformative; at worst, they can become the stimuli that lead to law breaking.
Demonstrations are particularly apt to degenerate into criminal conduct when they leave the site of the grievance and become mobile.
Petty criminals and street people looking for excitement attach themselves like remora to the fringes of the crowd and use the protest as an excuse for rock throwing, auto trashing, arson, window breaking, looting, pocket picking and general hooliganism.
Soon the whole purpose of the demonstration is lost in mob mania.
There are better ways to promote a cause.
Where non-violent civil disobedience is the centerpiece, rather than a lawful demonstration that may only attract crime, it is difficult to justify.
Some find no harm in the misdemeanors of trespass, minor property destruction, blocking traffic and the like.
They say these are small prices to pay for galvanizing action for the all-important cause.
The crimes may appear small, but the prices can be huge.
Here are two cases to illustrate.
Assume a neighborhood demonstration to protest speeding on a certain road or a careless accident involving a police car.
The protesters lie down in the street, blocking traffic, and will not move until the authorities carry them away.
Assume that someone caught in the jam has a heart attack.
There is no way to get an ambulance in quickly to move him to a hospital.
He dies.
The demonstration was non-violent and involved only a simple misdemeanor, but its impact on that individual was violent and terminal.
Assume that a TV network is airing a celebrity interview program with a live audience.
The politician appearing is highly controversial and has recently generated a good deal of rancor amid certain groups.
In a planned protest against his appearance, several members of the studio audience chain themselves in front of the TV cameras in such a way that the program cannot continue.
The network must refund money to the advertisers and loses considerable revenue and prestige.
The demonstrators have been non-violent, but the result of their trespasses has been to seriously impair the rights of others unconnected with their dispute.
It might be alleged that TV has done more than its share to popularize and promote non-violent civil disobedience, so the second situation hypothesized above would be simply a case of "chickens coming home to roost."
Or maybe the TV network would lose nothing.
Geraldo or Phil would probably pull up another camera and interview the chained protesters.
Let us look for a moment at another type of non-violent civil disobedience that only harms other people indirectly, yet does irreparable damage to the nation as a whole.
I am referring to those young men who chose to disobey their country's call to arms during the Vietnam war and fled to Canada or some other sanctuary to avoid combat.
Their cowardly acts of civil disobedience, which they tried to hide under the cloak of outrage at a war they characterized as "immoral," weakened the national fabric and threw additional burdens on those who served honorably in that conflict.
Even more at fault are those leaders in and out of government who urged and supported their defections, thereby giving great help and comfort to the enemy propagandists.
It is amazing that the ensuing mass executions in Vietnam and Cambodia do not weight more heavily on minds so morally fine-tuned.
Worse, it remained to a well-meaning but naive president of the United States to administer the final infamy upon those who fought and died in Vietnam.
Under the guise of "healing the wounds of the nation," President Carter pardoned thousands of draft evaders, thus giving dignity to their allegations of the war's "immorality."
The precedent having been set, who can complain if future generations called upon to defend the U.S. yield to the temptation to avoid the danger of combat by simply declaring the war immoral and hiding until it is over?
Finally, I think it important to point out the extraordinarily high visibility of non-violent civil disobedience in these days of intensive media coverage.
Give television a chance to cover live any breaking of the law, and no second invitation will be required.
This brings into question the motives of those who lead civil disobedience demonstrations.
Do they want the spotlight for themselves or for their cause?
Here is a good rule of thumb: If the movement produced the leader, the chance that he is sincere is much greater than if the leader produced the movement.
In either case, ask yourself whether you have become better informed on the issues under protest by watching the act of civil disobedience.
If you have not, it is probable that a thorough airing of the dispute by calm and rational debate would have been the better course.
Mr. Agnew was vice president of the U.S. from 1969 until he resigned in 1973.
As the leading candidate for president of his country in next year's election, Mario Vargas Llosa ought to be in an enviable position.
But his country is Peru, where political visibility, especially for a believer in democracy and free enterprise -- a right winger in Latin American eyes -- makes a man a target for assassination.
For almost any Peruvian these days, to show an interest in public office is a heroic gesture; for Mr. Vargas Llosa especially so, since he already has achieved a high position in the world's eyes as a writer.
Published everywhere to universal acclaim, doted on like a movie star in the Hispanic world from Barcelona to Ushuaia, Mr. Vargas Llosa could live comfortably on his royalties and console his political conscience with the thought that Peru is a hopeless mess not of his making and that he already did his best to reform it with his magnificently cinematic novel about the years of military dictatorship of his youth, "Conversation in the Cathedral."
But, after some hesitation, he is back on the stump and also still writing important novels about Peru.
"The Storyteller" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 246 pages, $17.95), splendidly translated by Helen Lane, first appeared in Spanish in 1987 before the Peruvian economy had reached its present state of virtual collapse.
And in any case the story takes place a bit earlier than that, when the guerrilla war in the highlands had not yet made internal travel a gamble with destiny.
Even still, the very first sentence of this fable that weaves together Peru's most advanced and most primitive cultural strands speaks of "my unfortunate country."
The narrator may be talking about the depredations of the Shining Path Maoists among the Indians of the Andes, or he may be referring to the plunging inti, Peru's rubber currency, or the corrupting effect of the cocaine trade.
But he is swiftly drawn into a tangle of memories about a less newsworthy and more exotic part of Peru: its corner of the Amazon jungle.
This narrator is a foil for Mr. Vargas Llosa, a cosmopolitan writer with one well-tailored leg in journalism.
He is in Florence to shake himself free of Peru and get some writing done, just as Mr. Vargas Llosa has gone to Paris and now goes frequently to London for the same purpose.
But this narrator happens upon some photographs in a gallery, pictures taken in Peruvian Amazonia of the untamed and nomadic Machiguenga tribe.
And they remind him of his own experiences with that unhappy scattered culture and of his friend at Lima's University of San Marcos, Saul Zuratas.
Saul was a high-strung student of ethnography, a Jew marked doubly as an outsider because of a huge wine-dark birthmark on his face, for which people called him Mascarita, Mask Face.
Saul knew about the Machiguengas from his studies, and through him the narrator became interested in this most recalcitrant and un-Westernizable of all the indigenous peoples who had come under the Spanish yoke.
Saul, meanwhile, came to believe that anthropology, even at its most benign, was as insidious a form of cultural imperialism as the superficially more blatant activities of Christian missionaries.
Saul mysteriously disappears.
This is what we know at the end of the opening section of "The Storyteller."
The next voice we hear sounds like this: "There was no evil, there was no wind, there was no rain.
The women bore pure children.
If Tasurinchi wanted to eat, he dipped his hand into the river and brought out a shad flicking its tail . . ."
And this: "Moving, walking.
Keeping on, with or without rain, by land or by water, climbing up the mountain slopes or climbing down the ravines."
The speaker is never identified.
He tells his stories in his majestically simple way, in a "language" all his own.
There are creation myths and cosmologies and hunting stories -- a whole culture is contained within these dreamy narratives.
It is as though Mr. Vargas Llosa had recorded a storytelling session at a Machiguenga campfire.
And this is just the effect he hopes to have on the reader, as he alternates chapters in his "own" voice with chapters somehow "borrowed" from the Machiguenga storyteller.
For most of the book, there is no direct connection between its urban and its Amazonian modes.
But the contrast between them becomes a living thing through the brilliant contrast of narrative styles that Mr. Vargas Llosa creates.
He controls this counterpoint like a novelistic Bach, reaching an audacious extreme in a hilarious chapter in which the "Vargas Llosa" voice relates his adventures as an inept television newsman.
But the joke turns serious when a reportage takes him to Amazonia and he encounters the missionaries who know more than anyone else about the Machiguengas.
By this point, the narrator has become obsessed with finding out about the Machiguenga storytellers, who, he had heard years before, functioned like cultural glue for a tribe split into many small bands in constant motion through the jungle.
The storytellers traveled among the bands, reminding them of their identity.
But why would no Machiguenga the narrator meets during his reportage even admit that there were storytellers?
The narrator eventually deduces the extraordinary answer, which is confirmed in a literally Kafkaesque manner by a storyteller in the next chapter.
I am trying to give away as little as possible, but this is not really a mystery or some kind of jungle thriller.
It will be read for the brilliant clash of styles of narration and the even more brilliant way that they have been tied together into a large metaphor for literature and its function in society.
It was a parent's ultimate nightmare.
As the crippled jet prepared for an emergency landing, Sylvia Tsao wrapped her 23-month-old son, Evan, in blankets and, following cabin-crew orders, placed him on the floor.
She held him down tightly, trying to protect him.
"Suddenly, the world seemed to end," she told investigators later.
Crashing into a cornfield, United Airlines' Flight 232 flipped over, and she lost her grip on her son.
"I saw for an instant my son's body floating and flying" toward the back of the plane, Ms. Tsao recalled.
When the plane stopped moving, she frantically tried to find him.
But Evan died of smoke inhalation.
July's Sioux City crash has fueled an emotionally charged debate.
Safety advocates and members of Congress, calling babies "the neglected population," are stepping up a campaign for the mandatory use of infant safety seats on all flights.
But the Federal Aviation Administration is reluctant to require separate seats for babies because of the added cost for traveling parents.
Some FAA officials note that few infants have been killed in plane crashes, raising the question of whether safety seats really are needed.
A 1981 Harvard Medical School study that scrutinized accidents in the late 1970s concluded that perhaps three babies would have been saved in a five-year period if safety-seat use had been required.
The National Transportation Safety Board will take a close look at the issue during four days of hearings that begin today on the broader issue of what caused the crash that killed 112 people.
"Infants', toddlers' and young children's safety should no longer be ignored as if they don't count," Mrs. Tsao wrote to the board in advocating use of the safety seats.
All 50 states require that small children be strapped into safety seats in cars.
On planes, FAA rules dictate that children two years old and over have their own tickets and be strapped into regular seats, just as adults are.
Babies under two may sit on laps and fly for free.
But it is almost impossible to keep hold of a baby during an air crash, or even in severe turbulence.
During the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson of Cincinnati lost her grip on her baby as the plane lurched and tipped over.
Another passenger heard one-year-old Sabrina's cry and pulled her from an overhead luggage compartment.
The FAA encourages the use of safety seats, but in the past many parents have run into problems trying to use them, even when the plane was only half-full or they had bought an extra ticket especially for the baby.
When Vanessa Merton, an associate dean at Pace University School of Law, decided to take her young son to Europe last spring, she called four carriers to ask about their policies on car seats.
"The people acted like I was transporting heroin," she says.
One reservation agent told her -- incorrectly -- that the airline barred the use of the seats on flights.
After the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson bought a car seat for her daughter for the flight home to Cincinnati.
But on one leg of the trip, she was ordered by a flight attendant to take Sabrina out of the seat and hold her during takeoff and landing -- the most dangerous parts of any flight.
Airlines say that such mistakes are decreasing in the aftermath of Sioux City, but proponents of the safety devices say they still get complaints from parents.
"People are told one thing on the phone, another at check in, another at the gate, and another on the plane," says Stephanie Tombrello, executive director of the Los Angeles Area Child Passenger Safety Association, which petitioned the FAA in June for mandatory use of child-safety seats.
The Association of Flight Attendants, the main flight attendants' union, is strongly backing that request.
The FAA argues that requiring safety seats for all babies might actually diminish, not enhance, safety.
As part of such a rule, officials say, parents would probably be required to buy an extra ticket for the baby.
The increased cost of flying would inevitably encourage some families to drive rather than fly, they say.
Commercial airlines have the lowest accident rate of all transportation modes -- much lower than cars, for example.
Anthony Broderick, the FAA's acting Executive Director for Regulatory Standards and Compliance, contends that the current rule is the best approach because it allows parents to make their own decision on whether to use a safety seat.
But he admits that the agency is in "a very uncomfortable position."
He says the agency soon will propose that airlines be prohibited from denying the use of safety seats.
(Most airlines don't prohibit their use.)
He says the agency also will seek public comment on whether the seats should be required.
Walter Coleman, Vice President of Operations for the Air Transport Association, the trade group for the major airlines, describes the call for safety seats as "legitimate" and says the group is studying the issue.
But privately some airline officials fear that if parents must buy extra tickets for babies, whole families will stop flying.
Others worry that the FAA might write a rule forcing airlines to pick up part of the tab for increased infant safety.
Generally, airlines say they welcome the use of a government-approved safety seat and will even allow the restraint to take up a regular seat for free if the flight isn't crowded.
(Most car seats made in recent years are certified for use on aircraft and are so marked.)
But space can only be guaranteed if a ticket is purchased.
What the industry really wants is some kind of device that would protect babies without taking up an extra seat.
But no one has come up with anything that is safer in a crash than the current practice of bundling babies up and trying to pin them to the floor.
Parents are advised against holding the infants, for fear that in an accident the babies could be crushed by the adult's weight.
Proponents of safety seats are turning up the heat on the FAA.
Yesterday, Rep. James Lightfoot, an Iowa Republican, sent FAA Administrator James Busey a letter signed by 56 House members urging the agency to require infant safety seats.
If the FAA refuses, Rep. Lightfoot says, he will push legislation to require the change.
It is a peaceful time in this part of western India.
The summer crop is harvested, winter sowing has yet to begin.
Farmers in loose turbans and fancy earrings spend their afternoons laughing and gossiping at the markets.
One could imagine such a lull in the lives of the Arabs before the quadrupling of oil prices.
For just as the Arabs were in the 1960s, the farmers of Sidhpur are on the brink of global power and fame.
The Arabs had merely oil.
These farmers may have a grip on the world's very heart.
Or, at least, its heart disease.
That is because Sidhpur has a near-monopoly on the world's supply of flea seed, also known as flea wort or, in Western parlance, psyllium: a tiny, tasteless, obscure seed that, according to early research, may reduce cholesterol levels in the blood.
Ever since the link to cholesterol was disclosed, Americans have begun scarfing up psyllium in their breakfast cereals.
If further research proves the seed's benefits, this dusty farm district could become the epicenter of a health-food fad to rival all fads since cod-liver oil.
"This seed's not grown anywhere else in India, or anywhere else in the world," says T.V. Krishnamurthy, a vice president of Procter & Gamble India Ltd., a major psyllium buyer and promoter.
"The proper climatic conditions don't exist in many places in the world."
Arvind Patel, a processor and exporter of the seed, raves: "If psyllium takes the place of oat bran, it will be huge."
Whether psyllium makes Sidhpur's fortune depends on cholesterol-fearing Americans, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and, of course, the outcome of further research.
Only one thing is certain here: Pysllium is likely to remain solely an export item from Sidhpur for a long time.
Local farmers say it is as good a cash crop as mustard or fenugreek, a legume.
But they have no desire to eat a bowl of psyllium each morning, and, perhaps, little need: lean, frugal vegetarians, the farmers are innocents in the clogged, treacherous world of cholesterol.
Psyllium is an annual herb, Plantago ovata, that has been used for centuries by folk doctors here, mainly as a laxative and anti-diarrheal.
As such, the soluble fiber has an almost fanatic following in northern India.
"I can assure you," attests a 25-year-old lawyer in New Delhi, with a meaningfully raised eyebrow, "from personal experience, it works."
A prominent businessman in Bombay gives a similar testimonial: "I have been taking it daily since 1961."
Folk doctors also prescribe it for kidney, bladder and urethra problems, duodenal ulcers and hemorrhoids.
Some apply it to gouty joints.
The plant has a hairy stem that produces flowers and diminutive seeds.
It is the seed's colorlessness and size -- 1,000 of them weigh only 1.5 grams, or about as much as two paper clips -- that explain the historical allusions to fleas.
The translucent husk of the seed is removed, sifted and crushed; the seed itself is fed to animals.
Some 90% of the crop, which was worth $26 million last year, is exported.
For decades, psyllium husk has been the main ingredient in such laxatives as Procter & Gamble Co.'s Metamucil, the top-selling brand in the U.S., and Ciba-Geigy Corp.'s Fiberall.
But some time ago, researchers discovered that soluble fibers also lower cholesterol levels in the blood.
Cincinnati-based P&G took an interest; it ordered two studies on psyllium and cholesterol.
One of the studies, done at the University of Minnesota, tested 75 people with raised cholesterol levels.
After 16 weeks, the group that took three daily teaspoons of Metamucil saw a significant dip in their general cholesterol levels, and an even larger reduction in levels of low-density lipoproteins, the so-called bad cholesterol.
In late 1987, P&G asked the FDA for approval to market Metamucil as the first non-prescription, cholesterol-lowering product in the U.S.
In April, the psyllium bandwagon got more crowded.
General Mills Inc., the food giant, launched a breakfast cereal called Benefit, containing psyllium, oat, wheat and beet bran; the words, "reduce cholesterol" were prominently displayed on its package.
In September, Kellogg Co. launched a competing psyllium-fortified cereal called Heartwise.
Suddenly, on television, in advertisements and on their cereal boxes, Americans were inundated with news about the obscure seed.
The flood of claims and counter-claims worried consumers and actually hurt sales of the new cereals.
This month, the Food and Drug Administration expressed concern that Americans might someday, in various forms, ingest too much psyllium.
Currently, there is a lull in the psyllium war.
The FDA has asked Kellogg and General Mills to show research that their cereals are safe.
It also ordered P&G to produce more studies to buttress its claims that Metamucil can lower cholesterol.
But the agency hasn't yanked psyllium off store shelves.
If the FDA approves the new uses of psyllium, other companies are expected to rush to market with psyllium products.
"It's going to be a sensational thing," says Mr. Krishnamurthy of P&G in Bombay.
Says psyllium exporter Mr. Patel: "I just got back yesterday from the U.S.
In the newspapers, on the radio and TV, psyllium is everywhere."
But the news of the boom has yet to trickle down to the farmers.
They only know of one use for the crop, as a laxative, and with psyllium prices currently languishing in the wake of a bumper crop, they think of the seed as a marginal crop, something to grow between summer wheat crops.
"Psyllium's not a good crop," complains Sooraji Jath, a 26-year-old farmer from the village of Lakshmipura.
"You get a rain at the wrong time and the crop is ruined."
Even at the Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics Export Promotion Council, the government agency that promotes the seed, the psyllium boom is distant thunder.
The staff brags about psyllium's hefty contribution to American regularity, without quite grasping the implications of the research on cholesterol.
The council's annual report has psyllium on its last page, lumped with such unglamorous export items as sarsaparilla and "Nux vomica," a plant that induces vomiting.
In one way, the psyllium middlemen -- the buyers and exporters -- are glad to keep news of the boom to themselves.
They want psyllium prices low for their purchases next year.
But there's a catch.
Sidhpur and adjacent districts are the only places in the world where psyllium is grown in large quantities.
This is partly due to the particular demands of the crop.
Psyllium needs sandy soil, dew during the first few weeks, and then total dryness when its seeds are maturing.
Small crops are grown in Pakistan, France, Spain, Italy, Belgium and Brazil, but their quality can't compare to that of Indian psyllium.
Big buyers like Procter & Gamble say there are other spots on the globe, and in India, where the seed could be grown.
"It's not a crop that can't be doubled or tripled," says Mr. Krishnamurthy.
But no one has made a serious effort to transplant the crop.
In Sidhpur, it is almost time to sow this year's crop.
Many farmers, too removed to glean psyllium's new sparkle in the West, have decided to plant mustard, fennel, cumin, fenugreek or castor-oil seeds.
Mr. Jath is thinking of passing up psyllium altogether this year in favor of a crop with a future such as cumin or fennel.
"Maybe I'll plant castor-oil seeds."
His brother, Parkhaji, whose head is swathed in a gorgeous crimson turban, nods vigorous assent.
So when next year's psyllium crop is harvested in March, it may be smaller than the 16,000 metric tons of the past few years -- right at the crest of the psyllium boom.
And the world could experience its first psyllium shortage.
Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega may have accomplished over the weekend what his U.S. antagonists have failed to do: revive a constituency for the Contra rebels.
Lawmakers haven't publicly raised the possibility of renewing military aid to the Contras, and President Bush parried the question at a news conference here Saturday, saying only that "if there's an all-out military offensive, that's going to change the equation 180 degrees."
But Mr. Ortega's threat over the weekend to end a 19-month cease-fire with the rebels seeking to topple him, effectively elevated the Contras as a policy priority just as they were slipping from the agendas of their most ardent supporters.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) said yesterday on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" that Mr. Ortega's threat was "a very unwise move, particularly the timing of it."
The threat came during a two-day celebration in Costa Rica to highlight Central America's progress toward democracy in the region, attended by President Bush, Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and 14 other Western Hemisphere leaders.
Mr. Bush returned to Washington Saturday night.
Mr. Ortega announced on Friday that he would end the cease-fire this week in response to the periodic Contra assaults against his army.
Saturday, he amended his remarks to say that he would continue to abide by the cease-fire if the U.S. ends its financial support for the Contras.
He asked that the remaining U.S. humanitarian aid be diverted to disarming and demobilizing the rebels.
Not only did Mr. Ortega's comments come in the midst of what was intended as a showcase for the region, it came as Nicaragua is under special international scrutiny in anticipation of its planned February elections.
Outside observers are gathering in Nicaragua to monitor the registration and treatment of opposition candidates.
And important U.S. lawmakers must decide at the end of November if the Contras are to receive the rest of the $49 million in so-called humanitarian assistance under a bipartisan agreement reached with the Bush administration in March.
The humanitarian assistance, which pays for supplies such as food and clothing for the rebels amassed along the Nicaraguan border with Honduras, replaced the military aid cut off by Congress in February 1988.
While few lawmakers anticipated that the humanitarian aid would be cut off next month, Mr. Ortega's threat practically guarantees that the humanitarian aid will be continued.
Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) said yesterday on "Meet the Press": "I would hope after his {Mr. Ortega's} act yesterday or the day before, we'd have unanimous support for quick action on remaining humanitarian aid."
Sen. Dole also said he hoped for unanimous support for a resolution he plans to offer tomorrow denouncing the Nicaraguan leader.
While renewing military aid had been considered out of the question, rejected by Congress and de-emphasized by the Bush administration, Mr. Ortega's statement provides Contra supporters with the opportunity to press the administration on the issue.
"The administration should now state that if the February election is voided by the Sandinistas . . . they should call for military aid," said former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.
"In these circumstances, I think they'd win."
Sen. Mitchell said that congressional Democrats intend to honor the March agreement to give non-lethal support to the Contras through the February elections, although he added that the agreement requires that the Contras not initiate any military action.
Mr. Ortega's threat to breach the cease-fire comes as U.S. officials were acknowledging that the Contras have at times violated it themselves.
Secretary of State James Baker, who accompanied President Bush to Costa Rica, told reporters Friday: "I have no reason to deny reports that some Contras ambushed some Sandinista soldiers."
Mr. Baker's assistant for inter-American affairs, Bernard Aronson, while maintaining that the Sandinistas had also broken the cease-fire, acknowledged: "It's never very clear who starts what."
He added that the U.S. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire.
In addition to undermining arguments in favor of ending Contra aid, Mr. Ortega's remarks also played to the suspicions of some U.S. officials and conservatives outside the government that he is searching for ways to manipulate or void the February elections.
Administration officials traveling with President Bush in Costa Rica interpreted Mr. Ortega's wavering as a sign that he isn't responding to the military attacks so much as he is searching for ways to strengthen his hand prior to the elections.
Mr. Abrams said that Mr. Ortega is seeking to demobilize the Contras prior to the elections to remove any pressure to hold fair elections.
"My sense is what they have in mind is an excuse for clamping down on campaigning" by creating an atmosphere of a military emergency, he said.
A frozen mountaintop in Tibet may offer an important clue about whether the Earth is warming perilously.
Researchers at Ohio State University and Lanzhou Institute of Glaciology and Geocryology in China have analyzed samples of glacial ice in Tibet and say temperatures there have been significantly higher on average over the past half-century than in any similar period in the past 10,000 years.
The ice samples are an important piece of evidence supporting theories that the Earth has warmed considerably in recent times, largely because of pollutants in the air, and will warm far more in the century ahead.
A substantial warming would melt some of the Earth's polar ice caps, raising the level of the oceans and causing widespread flooding of heavily populated coastal areas.
"If you can use data to reconstruct what happened in the past, you have much more confidence in predictions for the future," said Lonnie Thompson, a research scientist at Ohio State who dug for and analyzed the ice samples.
To compare temperatures over the past 10,000 years, researchers analyzed the changes in concentrations of two forms of oxygen.
These measurements can indicate temperature changes, researchers said, because the rates of evaporation of these oxygen atoms differ as temperatures change.
Analysis of ice from the Dunde ice cap, a glacial plateau in Tibet 17,000 feet above sea level, show that average temperatures were higher in 1937-87 than in any other 50-year period since before the last Ice Age, Mr. Thompson said.
Some climate models project that interior regions of Asia would be among the first to heat up in a global warming because they are far from oceans, which moderate temperature changes.
But the ice-core samples aren't definitive proof that the so-called greenhouse effect will lead to further substantial global heating, Mr. Thompson acknowledged.
According to greenhouse theories, increased carbon dioxide emissions, largely caused by burning of fossil fuels, will cause the Earth to warm up because carbon dioxide prevents heat from escaping into space.
Skeptics say that if that's the case, temperatures should have risen fairly uniformly over the past century, reflecting the increase in carbon dioxide.
Instead, the Dunde ice-core record shows increasing temperatures from 1900 through the early 1950s, decreasing temperatures from the late 1950s through the mid-1970s, then higher temperatures again through last year.
Other temperature data show similar unexplained swings.
"Climate varies drastically due to natural causes," said Mr. Thompson.
But he said ice samples from Peru, Greenland and Antarctica all show substantial signs of warming.
An enormous turtle has succeeded where the government has failed: He has made speaking Filipino respectable.
The 6 1/2-foot-tall turtle, Pong Pagong, is a character who stars in the children's television show "Batibot."
He speaks only in Filipino.
"Batibot," which started in 1983 as a hybrid of the U.S. program "Sesame Street," has developed into a distinctly Philippine effort.
Radio programs and books have followed the daily television show.
In the process, "Batibot," an archaic Filipino word meaning "strong" or "enduring," has become a powerful advocate of the use of the Filipino language.
"It impresses on ordinary, young Filipinos that there's nothing to feel inferior about in using their own language," says Randy David, a sociologist and host of a popular television talk show.
"When we started the program six years ago, the use of Filipino was deemed unwise by the predominantly middle class," says Lydia Brown, the program's creator.
Now, she says, "it's no longer an issue."
The success of "Batibot" stands in marked contrast to many academic and government attempts to promote Filipino as a national language.
Filipino -- once known as Pilipino -- is predominantly Tagalog, the Malay-based language spoken in a part of the country's principal island of Luzon.
Resistance to a national language comes primarily from members of the country's elite, who generally prefer English.
But while better-off Filipinos are quick to cite the logic in using a language as widespread as English, they are often slow to reveal that they are prejudiced against Filipino, say advocates of the native language.
"For the middle and upper-middle class {Filipino} is declasse," says Bien Lumbera, a Philippine-studies professor at Quezon City's University of the Philippines.
There's also resentment.
Other opponents of Filipino come from non-Tagalog regions.
They argue that their own languages should have equal weight, although recent surveys indicate that the majority of the country's population understands Filipino more than any other language.
(There are seven major languages and more than 70 dialects in the country.)
What tongue to speak is an emotional mine field in the Philippines.
It is entrenched in the country's colonial bonds to the U.S., in Philippine class structure, in the regional loyalties of its people and in its island geography.
As they did when the Philippines was a colony of the U.S., teachers for the most part teach in English, even though it is a foreign language for most Philippine children.
As a result, they often speak one language at home, another at school.
Mrs. Brown calls the modern-day cultural ambivalence to Filipino a "language schizophrenia."
The issue has been simmering for years.
It doesn't take much to provoke an intense debate.
When President Corazon Aquino, whose command of Filipino is spotty, announced last year that the language would be used in official communications, there was an uproar from many legislators, who continue to conduct debates mostly in English.
But many proponents of Filipino see resistance to the language finally crumbling.
They believe the media, including "Batibot," have played a crucial role.
According to chief scriptwriter Rene Villanueva, "Batibot" doesn't set out to advance the cause of Filipino.
"It's not as if we're teaching language per se," he says, "We're just using it."
These days, "Batibot" is produced in a converted lumberyard on a shoestring budget of $3,000 a one-hour segment.
It is shown weekdays on two of the country's five networks.
With an audience totaling more than 400,000, "Batibot" consistently ranks in the country's top-four most-watched daytime programs.
But advertising revenue is inadequate.
Periodically, there are threats that the program will fold.
"Batibot" lacks the polish of "Sesame Street."
Sound stages echo.
Acting sometimes falls flat.
There are only two large puppets in the program: Pong Pagong and a monkey named Kiko Matsing.
But the production is the equal of any local program.
And the show's creativity makes up for any technological deficiencies.
The program isn't afraid to tackle controversial topics such as nuclear weapons and the environment.
Not that the language war is won, even on "Batibot."
During one recent episode, all the advertisements were in English.
The Canadian government, with a view to becoming more politically active in Latin America, is expected to announce tomorrow its application to join the Organization of American States, a Washington-based regional agency.
The expected Canadian move has been welcomed by the Bush administration even though Canada has opposed such U.S. actions as the trade embargo against Cuba, the invasion of Grenada and the military support for Nicaragua's Contra guerrillas.
Latin American countries have long urged Canada to join the OAS in the hopes that it would be a counterweight to the U.S., which for many years tended to dominate the 32-nation organization.
Even though the U.S. also has supported Canadian membership, it hasn't been a Washington priority.
"The fact that we might not side with the Americans may be a reason why Canada's membership in the OAS hasn't been, over the years, an item high on the U.S. agenda," said Allan Gotlieb, former Canadian ambassador to the U.S.
The Canadian application is expected to be announced in San Jose, Costa Rica, by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who is attending a centenary celebration of Costa Rican democracy.
"Canada has a larger and more beneficial role to play in the hemisphere," Mr. Mulroney said recently.
Some Canadian political commentators have opposed Canada's joining what they see as a U.S.-dominated organization.
"Canada could do plenty of things to get serious about Latin America without running the risk of getting caught in the cross fire" between the U.S. and Latin American members of the OAS, said Jeffrey Simpson, a columnist in Toronto's Globe & Mail newspaper.
Canada, at times, could be an awkward OAS partner for the U.S. if its United Nations voting record is an indication.
In U.N. General Assembly votes last year, Canada voted the same as the U.S. only 63% of the time.
France voted the same as the U.S. 76% of the time, West Germany 79% and Britain 83%.
Larry Birns, director of the Washington-based Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberal research group, said that Latin American countries would be "profoundly disappointed" if Canada were to follow the U.S. lead in the OAS.
"Latin Americans see Canada as a non-interventionist power that respects their sovereignty," he said.
The OAS, which tries to promote peace and economic development within the Americas, is attempting to find a settlement of the current Panama political crisis.
Cuba has been suspended from OAS membership, but the organization's members are discussing Cuba's reinstatement.
Early this century, diamond mining in the magnificent dunes where the Namib Desert meets the Atlantic Ocean was a day at the beach.
Men would crawl in the sand looking for shiny stones.
It was as easy as collecting sea shells at Malibu.
Men are still combing the beach with shovels and hand brushes, searching for that unusual glint.
But only after a fleet of 336 gargantuan earthmoving vehicles belonging to De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the world's diamond kingpins, do their work.
Last year, 43 million tons of desert were moved from one dune to another to recover 934,242 carats, which comes to 46 tons of sand per carat, or one-fifth gram.
Oh yes, the Atlantic was also pushed back 300 yards.
"If there's diamonds out there, we'll get to them," says Les Johns, De Beers's engineering manager.
Here, wedged between shifting dunes and pounding waves at the world's most inhospitable diamond dig, lies the earth's most precious jewel box.
Thanks to centuries of polishing by Mother Nature -- first in the gentle current of the Orange River that carried the stones from South Africa's interior, then in the cold surf of the ocean, and finally in the coarse sands of the desert -- 98% of the diamonds uncovered are of gem quality.
While other mines might yield more carats, a higher percentage of them go to industrial use.
Since this treasure chest is too big to fit in a bank vault, it has been turned into one.
Months after railway worker Zacharias Lewala first picked up a diamond from the sand in 1908, the German colonialists who controlled Namibia proclaimed a wide swath of the desert -- about 200 miles north from the Orange River and 60 miles inland from the Atlantic -- a restricted area, a designation normally reserved for military operations.
When the Germans lost World War I, they lost Namibia to South Africa and the diamonds to Ernest Oppenheimer, patriarch of Anglo American Corp. and De Beers.
Today, no one gets in or out of the restricted area without De Beers's stingy approval.
The mining zone has thus remained one of the most desolate places in Africa.
Ghost towns dot the Namib dunes, proving diamonds aren't forever.
Oranjemund, the mine headquarters, is a lonely corporate oasis of 9,000 residents.
Jackals roam the streets at night, and gemsbok, hardy antelope with long straight horns, wander in from the desert to drink from water sprinklers.
On most days, the desert's heat and the cool of the ocean combine to create a mist like a damp rag.
The wind, stinging with sand, never seems to stop.
Still, miners from all parts of Namibia as well as professional staff from De Beers's head offices in South Africa and London keep coming.
And Oranjemund boasts attractions besides diamonds.
There are six video rental shops, three restaurants, one cinema and 34 sports and recreation clubs for everything from cricket to lawn bowling.
The pride of Oranjemund is the 18-hole golf course -- with the largest sand trap in the world.
Last year, when the rising Orange River threatened to swamp the course, the same engineers who are pushing back the Atlantic rushed to build a wall to hold back the flood.
"Nothing is too good for our golf course," says Tony George, a mining engineer.
Despite fears the mine may be partially nationalized by the new Namibian government following next month's elections freeing the country from South African control, De Beers engineers are working to extend the mine's productive life for another 25 years, from the current estimate of 10.
Huge machines that look as though they came from the Star Wars desert-battle scene lumber among the dunes.
Mechanized vacuum cleaners probe the sand like giant anteaters; a whirring ferris wheel-like excavator, with buckets instead of seats, chews through layers of compacted sand; tracks and conveyor belts, shuttling sand to the screening plants, criss-cross the beach.
Then there is the artificial sea wall, 600 yards long and 60 yards thick, jutting into the ocean.
Made of sand, it receives around-the-clock maintenance against the battering waves.
When the mining in front of the wall is complete, it is moved northward.
A companion jetty that helps hold back the sea looks like a rusting junkyard.
Engineers first used concrete blocks to bolster the barrier, but the ocean tossed them aside like driftwood.
Then someone decided to try broken-down earthmoving equipment that, inexplicably, held against the waves.
"The Caterpillar people aren't too happy when they see their equipment used like that," shrugs Mr. George.
"They figure it's not a very good advert."
Despite all these innovations, most of the diamonds are still found in the sand swept away by the men wielding shovels and brushes -- the ignominiously named "bedrock sweepers" who toil in the wake of the excavators.
Laboring in blue and gray overalls, they are supposed to concentrate on cleaning out crevices, and not strain their eyes looking for diamonds.
But should they spy one, the company will pay a bonus equal to one-third its value.
For these workers at the bottom of the mine's pay scale, this is usually enough to overcome the temptation to steal -- a crime that could earn them up to 15 years in jail.
Still, employees do occasionally try to smuggle out a gem or two.
One man wrapped several diamonds in the knot of his tie.
Another poked a hole in the heel of his shoe.
A food caterer stashed stones in the false bottom of a milk pail.
None made it past the body searches and X-rays of mine security.
The Food and Drug Administration banned all imports of mushrooms from China in response to a rash of food-poisoning outbreaks linked to canned Chinese mushrooms.
"The agency has concluded that contamination may be widespread throughout the mushroom-processing industry in China," an FDA spokesman said yesterday.
The agency won't allow mushrooms that were canned or packed in brine at any Chinese plant to enter the U.S. until "satisfactory sanitation-control measures are implemented in China to prevent" bacterial contamination.
On May 19, the FDA began detaining Chinese mushrooms in 68-ounce cans after more than 100 people in Mississippi, New York and Pennsylvania became ill from eating tainted mushrooms.
In subsequent tests, the agency found smaller-size cans from several Chinese plants to be similarly contaminated.
The outbreaks were traced to Staphylococcus aureus, a type of bacteria that produces a toxin capable of surviving the high temperatures used in canning vegetables.
A recall of the mushrooms blamed for the food poisoning began in early March.
In 1987, China exported 65 million pounds of mushrooms, valued at $47 million, to the U.S.
The shipments went mostly to food-service distributors that supply pizzerias and restaurants.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here said that the Beijing government has taken "many effective measures" to stop the mushroom contamination and is further investigating the underlying causes.
He predicted the problem will be solved "very soon."
Outside the white-walled headquarters of the so-called Society of Orange Workers, all seems normal in South Africa's abnormal society.
A pickup truck driven by a white farmer rumbles past with a load of black workers bouncing in the back.
Over at Conradies, the general store, a black stock boy scurries to help an elderly white woman with her packages.
Down the street, a car pulls into the Shell station and is surrounded by black attendants.
But inside the white walls of the Orange Workers' office -- just about the largest building in town, save for the Dutch Reformed Church and the school -- South Africa's neat racial order is awry.
A dozen white office workers fold newsletters and stuff them into envelopes.
White women serve tea and coffee, and then wash the cups and saucers afterwards.
White children empty the wastepaper baskets and squeegee the windows.
There isn't a black worker in sight.
Not in the kitchen, or the storeroom or the book shop.
"If we want to have our own nation, then we must be willing to do all the work ourselves," says Hendrik Verwoerd Jr., son of the former prime minister and the leader of the Orange Workers, founded in 1980.
They do indeed want their own nation.
The pillars of apartheid may be trembling in the rest of South Africa, with Johannesburg opening its public facilities to all races, blacks storming the all-white beaches of the Cape and the government releasing seven leaders of the banned African National Congress.
But here in Morgenzon, a sleepy town amid the corn fields of the eastern Transvaal, the Orange Workers are holding the pillars steady.
The Orange Workers -- who take their name from William of Orange of the Netherlands, a hero of the Dutch-descended Afrikaners -- believe that the solution to South Africa's racial problems isn't the abolition of apartheid, it's the perfection of apartheid -- complete and total separation of the races.
Here, then, is where the Orange Workers have come to make apartheid's last stand.
Their idea is to create a city, first, and then an entire nation -- without blacks.
This may seem to be a preposterous and utterly futile effort in Africa.
And the fact that there are only 3,000 card-carrying Orange Workers may put them on the loony fringe.
But their ideal of an Afrikaner homeland, an all-white reserve to be carved out of present-day South Africa, is a mainstream desire of the right-wing, which embraces about one-third of the country's five million whites.
Afrikaner philosophers and theologians have long ruminated on the need for a white homeland.
The Orange Workers are just putting this preaching into practice.
Thus, farmer Johan Fischer, his T-shirt and jeans covered in grease, crawls around under his planter, tightening bolts and fixing dents.
On almost every other farm in South Africa, black workers do the repairs.
But not here.
Mr. Fischer plows his own fields, sows his own corn and sunflowers, and feeds his own sheep.
Over at the fiberglass factory, four white workers assemble water tanks on their own, and in their spare time they build townhouses across the road.
On Main Street, Alida Verwoerd and her daughters look after the clothes and fabric shop, then hurry home to fix lunch for the rest of the family.
Down by the stream, a group of Orange Workers puts the finishing touches on a golf course.
If whites want to play there by themselves, says consulting engineer Willem van Heerden, whites should also build it by themselves.
"If we want to survive as a people," he says, "we have to change our way of life.
The Afrikaner must end his reliance on others."
In their quest to perfect apartheid, the Orange Workers have discovered a truth that most of privileged white South Africa tries mightily to deny: The master can't become dependent on the slave and expect to remain master forever.
"If apartheid means you want cheap black labor and all the comforts that go with it, but you also want to exclude the blacks from social and political integration, then these are two contradictions that can't go on forever," says Mr. Verwoerd.
He is sitting in his living room, beneath a huge portrait of his late father, Hendrik F. Verwoerd, apartheid's architect and South African prime minister from 1958 to 1966.
Somewhere, the son sighs, things went terribly wrong with apartheid; today, whites even rely on blacks to police their separation.
"People took separate development as an opportunity to use black labor without ever getting rid of it.
But my father meant it to mean real separation," says the son.
The Orange Workers speak sincerely.
"We agree with world opinion that the status quo in South Africa is morally wrong," says Pieter Bruwer, the Orange Workers' chief scribe and pamphleteer.
"We must either integrate honestly or segregate honestly."
Morgenzon has long been a special domain of Afrikanerdom.
According to Mr. Verwoerd, the early Afrikaner pioneers were the first people to settle in the eastern Transvaal, even before the blacks.
Then, when Morgenzon was incorporated in 1908, the farmer who owned the land stipulated that only whites could reside in town; blacks could work there, but they had to leave at night.
Today, Morgenzon is a town of 800 whites and two paved roads.
Weeds push up through the cracks in the sidewalks, and many houses and storefronts are empty.
There are few factories and no mines.
It was an ideal place for the Orange Workers to start their new nation, unencumbered by the demographics that have undermined apartheid elsewhere in South Africa.
So far, about 150 Orange Workers have moved here, spending nearly $1 million buying up property over the past three years.
Still, complete and total segregation remains elusive.
Just beyond the city limits is a shantytown of 2,000 blacks who are employed throughout the area.
Despite the Orange Workers' intention to put them all out of work, they are in no hurry to leave.
A young man called July (that's when he was born), who works at the railroad station just up the street from the Orange Workers office, points at the white walled building and says matter-of-factly, "We're not allowed in there, that's all I know."
The 650-or-so local whites who aren't Orange Workers are more troubled.
Try as they might, they just can't conceive of life without black workers.
"Impossible, impossible," say the Conradies, an elderly couple who have run the general store for decades.
"We can't do without their help," says Mrs. Conradie.
"Oh no.
We need them and I thank God for them."
Over at the Shell station, owner Rudi van Dyk, who doubles as Morgenzon's mayor, worries that the Orange Workers have made his town the laughingstock of the nation.
"What they want us to do just isn't practical," he says, noting that he employs 16 blacks.
"I couldn't afford to hire 16 whites.
The only Afrikaners who would be willing to work for this salary wouldn't know how to handle money."
Back at the Verwoerd house, Hendrik Sr. peers down over the shoulder of Hendrik Jr.
The son believes that when the Afrikaners finally realize there is no turning back the integration of South African society and politics, Morgenzon will boom.
"We urge our people not to wait until they have to fight for their own nation," says Mr. Verwoerd.
"By populating a place now, we make ourselves a power any new government will have to take into account."
Curiously, he compares the Orange Workers to the ANC, which his father outlawed in 1960.
"The ANC won't be stopped until there is a provision for black aspirations," says Mr. Verwoerd.
"Likewise, no government will stop this idea of the Afrikaners."
He apologizes for sounding pushy.
"Look," he says, "If the rest of South Africa wants to have an integrated melting pot, that's their choice.
We'll leave them alone.
We just want to have our own cup of tea."
And they will even serve it themselves.
When Maj. Moises Giroldi, the leader of the abortive coup in Panama, was buried, his body bore several gunshot wounds, a cracked skull and broken legs and ribs.
They were the signature of his adversary, Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The rebel officer's slow and painful death, at the headquarters of Panama's Battalion-2000 squad, was personally supervised by Gen. Noriega, says a U.S. official with access to intelligence reports.
Leaping into rages, sinking into bouts of drunkenness and mistrust, Mr. Noriega has put to death some 70 of his troops involved in the coup, according to U.S. officials monitoring crematoriums and funeral parlors in Panama City.
He is now changing the place he sleeps every night, sometimes more than once a night.
His meals are most often prepared by women he trusts -- his full-time mistress, Vicky Amado, and her mother, Norma.
And he is collecting the names of those who telephoned the coup-makers to congratulate them during their brief time in control of his headquarters.
More enemies to be dealt with.
In the two weeks since the rebellion, which the U.S. hesitantly backed, Mr. Noriega has been at his most brutal-and efficient-in maintaining power.
Yet, while the failed coup is a major U.S. foreign policy embarrassment, it is merely the latest chapter in a byzantine relationship between Mr. Noriega and Washington that stretches back three decades.
America's war on the dictator over the past two years, following his indictment on drug charges in February 1988, is the legacy of that relationship.
Before American foreign policy set out to destroy Noriega, it helped create him out of the crucible of Panama's long history of conspirators and pirates.
For most of the past 30 years, the marriage was one of convenience.
In 1960, for example, when Mr. Noriega was both a cadet at an elite military academy in Peru and a spy-in-training for the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, he was detained by Lima authorities for allegedly raping and savagely beating a prostitute, according to a U.S. Embassy cable from that period.
The woman had nearly died.
But U.S. intelligence, rather than rein in or cut loose its new spy, merely filed the report away.
Mr. Noriega's tips on emerging leftists at his school were deemed more important to U.S. interests.
From that point on, the U.S. would make a practice of overlooking the Panamanian's misadventures.
The U.S. has befriended and later turned against many dictators, but none quite so resourceful.
The 55-year-old Mr. Noriega isn't as smooth as the shah of Iran, as well-born as Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza, as imperial as Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines or as bloody as Haiti's Baby Doc Duvalier.
Yet he has proved more resilient than any of them.
And out of necessity: the U.S. can make mistakes and still hope to remove him from power, but a single error on his part could cost him his life.
"The U.S. underestimated Noriega all along," says Ambler Moss, a former Ambassador to Panama.
"He has mastered the art of survival."
In keeping with America's long history of propping up Mr. Noriega, recent U.S. actions have extended rather than shortened his survival.
Mr. Noriega might have fallen of his own weight in 1988 because of Panama's dire economic situation, says Mr. Moss, but increasing external pressure has only given him additional excuses for repression, and a scapegoat for his own mismanagement.
"If the U.S. had sat back and done nothing, he might not have made it through 1988," Mr. Moss contends.
Perhaps most important, Mr. Noriega's allies have intervened to encourage -- in some cases, to demand -- that the dictator maintain his grip of the throne.
One Colombian drug boss, upon hearing in 1987 that Gen. Noriega was negotiating with the U.S. to abandon his command for a comfortable exile, sent him a hand-sized mahogany coffin engraved with his name.
"He is cornered," says the Rev. Fernando Guardia, who has led Catholic Church opposition against Noriega.
"The Americans have left him without a way out.
It is easy to fight when you don't have any other option."
His chief advantage in the fight: his intimate knowledge of American ways and weaknesses.
Mr. Noriega often tells friends that patience is the best weapon against the gringos, who have a short attention span and little stomach for lasting confrontation.
The U.S. discovered the young Tony Noriega in late 1959, when he was in his second year at the Chorrillos Military Academy in Lima, according to former U.S. intelligence officials.
The contact occurred through Mr. Noriega's half-brother, a Panamanian diplomat based in Peru named Luis Carlos Noriega Hurtado.
Luis Carlos, knowing that helping the Americans could advance the career of any Panamanian officer, relayed Tony's reports on the leftist tendencies he observed among his fellow students and, more important, among his officers and instructors.
A spy was born.
It was a heady experience for the pockmarked and slightly built Mr. Noriega, who was known to his friends as Cara la Pina -- pineapple face.
Born the illegitimate son of his father's maid, he was raised on the mean streets of the central market district of Panama City.
Tony was four years older than most of his fellow cadets, and gained admission to the academy because his brother had falsified his birth certificate.
He considered himself intellectually superior to his Peruvian peers, many of whom were wayward sons sent by their well-off families to the highly disciplined, French-modeled academy as a sort of reform school.
In his peaked military cap and neatly pressed, French-made uniform, Noriega felt more respected and powerful than ever in his underprivileged life, friends from the period say.
"He had an elegant uniform with gold buttons in a country where there was a cult of militarism, where officers were the elite with special privileges," recalls Darien Ayala, a fellow student in Peru and a lifelong friend.
Mr. Noriega's relationship to American intelligence agencies became contractual in either 1966 or 1967, intelligence officials say.
His commanding officer at the Chiriqui Province garrison, Major Omar Torrijos, gave him an intriguing assignment: Mr. Noriega would organize the province's first intelligence service.
The spy network would serve two clients: the Panamanian government, by monitoring political opponents in the region, and the U.S., by tracking the growing Communist influence in the unions organized at United Fruit Co.'s banana plantations in Bocas del Toros and Puerto Armuelles.
United Fruit was one of the two largest contributors to Panama's national income.
Satisfying its interests was a priority for any Panamanian leader.
Mr. Noriega's initial retainer was only $50 to $100 a month, plus occasional gifts of liquor or groceries from the American PX, a former intelligence official says.
It was modest pay by American standards, but a healthy boost to his small military salary, which fellow officers remember as having been $300 to $400 monthly.
"He did it very well," recalls Boris Martinez, a former Panamanian colonel who managed Mr. Noriega and his operation.
"He started building the files that helped him gain power."
A National Guard job assumed by Capt. Noriega in 1964 -- as chief of the transit police in David City, capital of the Chiriqui Province -- was tailor-made for an aspiring super-spy.
By pressuring taxi and bus drivers who needed licenses, he gained a ready cache of information.
He knew which local luminaries had been caught driving drunk, which had been found with their mistresses.
This proved particularly valuable to the Panamanian government in 1967, when union leaders were planning a May Day march that the government feared could turn violent.
Mr. Noriega had learned that a local union leader was sleeping with the wife of his deputy.
So he splashed the information on handbills that he distributed throughout the banana-exporting city of Puerto Armuelles, which was ruled by United Fruit Co.
The campaign so divided union leaders that the government found them far easier to control.
"It was like a play on Broadway," recalls Mr. Martinez.
"Noriega managed the whole thing.
He was superb.
Noriega was an expert at bribing and blackmailing people."
During his years in Chiriqui, however, Mr. Noriega also revealed himself as an officer as perverse as he was ingenious.
Rodrigo Miranda, a local lawyer and human-rights monitor, recalls an intoxicated Noriega visiting prisoners in their cells at the 5th Zone Garrison headquarters in David, where he had his offices.
Mr. Noriega would order them all to take off their clothes and run around the courtyard naked, laughing at them and then retreating to his office.
"People started wondering if something was wrong with him," Mr. Miranda recalls.
But through this period, so far as the U.S. military was concerned, Mr. Noriega was a model recruit.
He signed up for intelligence and counter-intelligence training under American officers at Fort Gulick in Panama in July 1967, according to a copy of a 1983 resume with details Mr. Noriega has since classified as secret.
He flew to Fort Bragg, N.C., in September of that year for a course in psychological operations, returning to the School of the Americas in Panama for a two-month course called "military intelligence for officers."
Some American officers interpreted his eagerness and studiousness as a sign of loyalty, but they did so falsely.
He rose to chief of intelligence in Panama's so-called G-2 in 1970 after providing populist dictator Torrijos the critical support to defeat a coup attempt against him a year earlier.
He became Gen. Torrijos's inseparable shadow, and the holder of all Panama's secrets.
Mr. Noriega, by now a lieutenant colonel, expanded his contacts to include the Cubans -- not to mention the Israelis, the Taiwanese and any other intelligence service that came knocking.
When U.S. diplomats complained to the CIA of Col. Noriega's moonlighting, intelligence experts always insisted that his allegiance was first to the Americans.
"Early on in the State Department, we took to calling him the rent-a-colonel, in tribute to his ability to simultaneously milk the antagonistic intelligence services of Cuba and the United States," recalls Francis J. McNeil, who, as deputy assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, first ran across reports about Mr. Noriega in 1977.
"Some of us wondered how our intelligence people could put so much stock in his information when he was just as close to the Cubans."
Even at this early stage, drugs caused additional concerns.
During the Nixon administration, the Drug Enforcement Administration became dismayed at the extent of the G-2's connections to arrested drug traffickers.
One DEA agent drew up a list of five options for dealing with Col. Noriega, one of which was assassination.
The head of the DEA at the time, John Ingersoll, scotched the assassination plan.
But he did fly to Panama to scold dictator Torrijos on the drug ties of Panamanian officials, including Mr. Noriega.
Mr. Ingersoll later recalled that Gen. Torrijos seemed afraid to act on the concerns of the U.S.
"Everybody was afraid of him," Mr. Ingersoll says.
Mr. Noriega became an even greater threat in 1976, when U.S. intelligence services discovered that he had been buying recordings of electronically monitored conversations from three sergeants working for the U.S. Army's 470th Military Intelligence Group.
The tapes included wiretaps of Gen. Torrijos's own phone, according to American intelligence officials.
"We caught him with his hands on our cookie jar," says former CIA Director Stansfield Turner.
For the first time, the U.S. considered cutting Mr. Noriega from its intelligence payroll -- and the deliberations were intense, Mr. Turner says.
"In the world of intelligence, if you want to get information, you get it from seedy characters.
The question is how much you get tied in with seedy characters so they can extort you."
Intelligence officials to this day worry whether Mr. Noriega sold sensitive information on the recordings to the Cubans or others.
Mr. Turner was troubled enough to cancel the U.S. contract with the rent-a-colonel at the beginning of the Carter administration.
The U.S. soon found new cause for concern: gun-running.
Prosecutors in Southern Florida indicted five Panamanians on charges of illegally running arms to Sandinista rebels trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan government of Mr. Somoza.
They included one of Mr. Noriega's closest friends and business partners, Carlos Wittgreen.
And the investigators were quickly closing in on Mr. Noriega himself.
At the time, though, in 1979, the U.S. was once again flirting with its longtime Latin American spy.
Mr. Noriega made plans to fly to Washington for a meeting with his counterpart at the Pentagon.
Dade County and federal authorities, learning that he intended to fly through Miami, made plans to arrest him on the gun-running charges as soon as he hit U.S. soil.
It was a Friday in June.
The Pentagon foiled the plan.
According to military officers at the time, word was passed to Mr. Noriega by his American hosts that the police would be waiting.
On Monday, U.S. officials received a routine, unclassified message from the military group commander in Panama.
"Due to health reasons, Lt. Col. Noriega has elected to postpone his visit to Washington," it read.
Prosecutors in Miami received yet another setback.
Their original indictment against Mr. Wittgreen, the friend of Mr. Noriega, and the other four was dismissed on a technicality.
But now, along with re-indicting Mr. Noriega's pal, they intended to charge Mr. Noriega himself, on allegations that he was involved in the illegal trading of some $2 million in arms.
In January 1980, Jerome Sanford, as assistant U.S. attorney, was summoned to a meeting with a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent assigned to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Miami.
Panamanian dictator Torrijos, he was told, had granted the shah of Iran asylum in Panama as a favor to Washington.
Mr. Sanford was told Mr. Noriega's friend, Mr. Wittgreen, would be handling the shah's security.
It wouldn't be a good idea to indict him -- much less Mr. Noriega, the prosecutor was told.
After prodding from Mr. Sanford, U.S. Attorney Jack Eskenazi pleaded with Justice Department officials in Washington to let the indictment proceed.
"Unfortunately," Mr. Eskenazi wrote in a letter, "those of us in law enforcement in Miami find ourselves frequently attempting to enforce the laws of the United States but simultaneously being caught between foreign policy considerations over which we have no control."
The letter, along with a detailed prosecution memo, sat on the desks of Justice officials for months before the case died a quiet death.
"I think if we had been allowed to go ahead then we wouldn't have the problems we have now," Mr. Sanford says.
"If he had been found guilty, we could have stopped him."
In August 1983, Mr. Noriega took over as General and de-facto dictator of Panama, having maneuvered his way to the top only two years after the mysterious death in a plane crash of his old boss Omar Torrijos.
Soon, the military became a veritable mafia controlling legal and illegal businesses.
The Reagan administration also put Mr. Noriega's G-2 back on the U.S. payroll.
Payments averaged nearly $200,000 a year from the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency and the CIA.
Although working for U.S. intelligence, Mr. Noriega was hardly helping the U.S. exclusively.
During the Reagan years he expanded his business and intelligence contacts with the Cubans and the Sandinistas.
He allegedly entered into Panama's first formal business arrangement with Colombian drug bosses, according to Floyd Carlton, a pilot who once worked for Mr. Noriega and who testified before the U.S. grand jury in Miami that would ultimately indict the Panamanian on drug charges.
But Mr. Noriega was convinced the Reagan White House wouldn't act against him, recalls his close ally Jose Blandon, because he had an insurance policy: his involvement with the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Mr. Blandon says the general allowed the Contras to set up a secret training center in Panama.
Mr. Noriega also conveyed intelligence from his spy operation inside the Nicaraguan capital of Managua.
And on at least one occasion, in the spring of 1985, he helped arrange a sabotage attack on a Sandinista arsenal in Nicaragua.
Although his help for the Contra cause was limited, it was enough to win him important protectors in the Reagan administration, says Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who then served on the Senate Intelligence Committee.
"Noriega played U.S. intelligence agencies and the U.S. government like a violin," he says.
An incident in 1984 suggested one additional means by which Mr. Noriega might have maintained such influence with Washington -- by compromising U.S. officials.
Curtin Windsor, then the ambassador to Costa Rica, recalls being invited to Panama by Mr. Noriega's brother Luis Carlos for a weekend of deep sea fishing and "quiet, serious conversation" on the Aswara Peninsula.
Mr. Windsor notified Everett E. Briggs, the U.S. ambassador to Panama, of the invitation.
"Briggs screamed," Mr. Windsor recalls.
He says Mr. Briggs told him he was being set up for a "honey trap," in which Mr. Noriega would try to involve him in an orgy and then record the event "with sound and video."
Mr. Briggs, on vacation after resigning his position at the National Security Council, couldn't be reached for comment.
As Mr. Noriega's political troubles grew, so did his offers of assistance to the Contras, an apparent attempt to curry more favor in Washington.
For instance, he helped steal the May 1984 Panamanian elections for the ruling party.
But just one month later, he also contributed $100,000 to a Contra leader, according to documents released for Oliver North's criminal trial in Washington, D.C.
Yet, his political setbacks mounted.
Mr. Noriega was accused of ordering in 1985 the beheading of Hugo Spadafora, his most outspoken political opponent and the first man to publicly finger Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
He then ousted President Nicholas Ardito Barletta, a former World Bank official with close ties to the U.S., after Mr. Barletta tried to create a commission to investigate the murder.
And, all the while, Panama's debt problems continued to grow.
Mr. Noriega was growing desperate.
In late 1986, he made an offer he thought the U.S. couldn't refuse.
As recounted in a stipulation that summarized government documents released for the North trial, Mr. Noriega offered to assassinate the Sandinista leadership in exchange "for a promise to help clean up Noriega's image and a commitment to lift the {U.S.} ban on military sales to the Panamanian Defense Forces."
"North," the document went on, referring to Oliver North, "has told Noriega's representative that U.S. law forbade such actions.
The representative responded that Noriega had numerous assets in place in Nicaragua and could accomplish many essential things, just as Noriega had helped {the U.S.} the previous year in blowing up a Sandinista arsenal."
Col. North conveyed the request to his superiors and to Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams, who relayed it to Secretary of State George Shultz.
Mr. Noriega's proposal was turned down.
And Mr. Shultz curtly told Mr. Abrams that the general should be told that only he could repair his tarnished image.
The end of the marriage was at hand.
Within weeks the unfolding Iran-Contra scandal took away Mr. Noriega's insurance policy.
The death of CIA Director William Casey and resignation of Oliver North allowed anti-Noriega political forces to gain influence.
Public protests against him were triggered in June 1987 due to charges by Diaz Herrera, his former chief of staff, that Mr. Noriega had stolen the 1984 election and had ordered the killing of Messrs. Spadafora and Torrijos.
Few American officials were willing any longer to defend him.
Lawyers in Miami -- this time working virtually without impediment -- prepared to have him indicted on drug charges in February 1988.
During negotiations with American officials in May 1988 over proposals to drop the U.S. indictments in exchange for his resignation, Mr. Noriega often asked almost plaintively how the Americans, whom he had helped for so many years, could turn against him.
Now, neither side -- the U.S. nor Mr. Noriega -- has an easy out.
President Bush has sworn to bring him to justice.
Mr. Noriega believes he hasn't any alternative but to continue clutching to power.
It is a knock-out battle -- perhaps to the death.
In the end, is Mr. Noriega the political equivalent of Frankenstein's monster, created by a well-intentioned but misguided foreign power?
Not quite, Sen. Leahy contends.
"For short-term gains, people were willing to put up with him.
That allowed him to get stronger and stronger," he says.
"I don't think we created him as much as we fed him, nurtured him and let him grow up to be big and strong."
The nations of southern Africa know a lot about managing elephants; their herds are thriving.
But the nations of Europe and North America have decided they know better.
At this week's U.N. conference in Lausanne, they imposed a global ivory ban that seeks to overturn local policies.
A Zimbabwean delegate argued that the ban would "guarantee the extinction of the elephant."
Legitimate ranchers, who have an interest in preserving the herds, would go out of business.
Poachers would control the underground trade.
Many delegates were willing to craft a compromise, but U.S. delegate Constance Harriman and others thundered that down.
The Greens from the First World wanted a morality play, not a negotiation.
Fortunately, the nations of southern Africa haven't totally surrendered their sovereignty.
Five countries announced they would not honor what one Zimbabwean delegate wryly called the "made in Switzerland" solution.
In fact, they seemed a mite resentful.
The director of Zimbabwe's Wildlife Department described American conservationists as "fat little puppies from urban environments who don't know a thing about Africa."
That's not fair; they're not all fat.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev wants to bring the nation's reformist press back into line, blaming it for contributing to the many problems he faces and even suggesting that one liberal editor resign.
Mr. Gorbachev's comments, made at a meeting with Soviet national editors and media executives Friday, indicate his growing frustration with the nation's mounting problems.
According to people who attended, he didn't advocate an end to glasnost, his policy of openness.
But he made clear that the press should show greater responsibility in its reporting and cut back on criticism of his reforms.
The text of his remarks hasn't been published, and editors say they have no instructions as to whether it will be.
Accounts of previous such meetings with media and other groups have been printed, sometimes after a delay of several days.
Although glasnost has given the government-controlled media here much greater freedom to report and criticize, Mr. Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders still regard newspapers and TV as important propaganda tools they can use at will.
According to participants at the meeting and Soviet journalists who were later briefed by their editors, Mr. Gorbachev blamed the press for fueling a nationwide mood of despondency.
In particular, he complained about some articles this summer that openly discussed the possibility of a coup or civil war in the Soviet Union, and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by printing stories about impending shortages.
He singled out the daily Izvestia and the weekly Argumenty i Fakty, and also gave stinging criticism of Yuri Afanasyev, a leading reformist historian who has written articles attacking the Communist Party.
Among other things, Mr. Gorbachev questioned whether Mr. Afanasyev should remain in the party.
The meeting lasted a little under two hours and was attended by most members of the ruling Politburo.
There was no other speaker apart from the Soviet leader, and those attacked weren't given the opportunity to defend themselves.
Mr. Afanasyev, who isn't an editor, didn't attend.
According to participants, Mr. Gorbachev was particularly incensed by an article on the front page of Argumenty i Fakty this month that examined the popularity of members of the Soviet Parliament.
The piece was based on a survey of 1,500 readers' letters and contained some criticism of Mr. Gorbachev himself.
The newspaper wrote that readers assessed his role both positively and negatively.
It said many thanked the Soviet leader for his "self-control, modesty, culture and ability to hear a speaker out."
But others criticized him, "for imposing his opinion on other deputies, giving commentaries to many speeches, holding elections with no choice of candidate, putting pressure on the voting process and maneuvering between the right and left wings" of the Parliament.
All this, the paper quoted readers as saying, "has seriously weakened his authority."
The Soviet leader apparently suggested to Argumenty i Fakty's editor, Vyacheslav Starkov, that he should resign.
The comment, which Mr. Starkov relayed to his staff, has sparked anger and bitterness at the paper.
Mr. Starkov has been summoned to see the Kremlin's ideology chief, Vadim Medvedev, in the near future, and may discover then if he is to be fired.
Izvestia was criticized for a front-page article last Wednesday that took a sharp look at the Parliament's activities.
It attacked the level of a debate on the private-sector cooperative movement, saying "the discussion was more like a riot than a civilized exchange of points of view."
And it questioned the speed with which the Parliament was adopting new legislation, often with a minimum of debate.
Speaking to foreign reporters, Ivan Laptev, Izvestia's editor, sought to play down Mr. Gorbachev's criticism, but he acknowledged that his paper had been singled out.
The Parliament yesterday approved legislation that imposes new restrictions on the cooperative movement, enabling local authorities to set ceilings for prices and preventing the "speculative" sale of goods in short supply for prices higher than that charged by the state.
Walter Sisulu and the African National Congress came home yesterday.
After 26 years in prison, Mr. Sisulu, the 77-year-old former secretary-general of the liberation movement, was dropped off at his house by a prison services' van just as the sun was coming up.
At the same time, six ANC colleagues, five of whom were arrested with him in 1963 and sentenced to life imprisonment, were reunited with their families at various places around the country.
And as the graying men returned to their homes, the ANC, outlawed in South Africa since 1960 and still considered to be the chief public enemy by the white government, defiantly returned to the streets of the country's black townships.
A huge ANC flag, with black, green and gold stripes, was hoisted over the rickety gate at Mr. Sisulu's modest house, while on the street out front, boys displayed the ANC colors on their shirts, caps and scarves.
At the small four-room home of Elias Motsoaledi, a leading ANC unionist and a former commander in the group's armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, well-wishers stuck little ANC flags in their hair and a man tooted on an antelope horn wrapped in ANC ribbons.
"I am happy to see the spirit of the people," said Mr. Sisulu, looking dapper in a new gray suit.
As the crowd outside his home shouted "ANC, ANC," the old man shot his fists into the air.
"I'm inspired by the mood of the people."
Under the laws of the land, the ANC remains an illegal organization, and its headquarters are still in Lusaka, Zambia.
But the unconditional release of the seven leaders, who once formed the intellectual and organizational core of the ANC, is a de facto un-banning of the movement and the rebirth of its internal wing.
"The government can never put the ANC back into the bottle again," said Cassim Saloojee, a veteran anti-apartheid activist on hand to welcome Mr. Sisulu.
"Things have gone too far for the government to stop them now.
There's no turning back."
There was certainly no stopping the tide of ANC emotion last night, when hundreds of people jammed into the Holy Cross Anglican Church in Soweto for what became the first ANC rally in the country in 30 years.
Deafening chants of "ANC" and "Umkhonto we Sizwe" shook the church as the seven aging men vowed that the ANC would continue its fight against the government and the policies of racial segregation on all fronts, including the armed struggle.
And they called on the government to release Nelson Mandela, the ANC's leading figure, who was jailed with them and remains in prison.
Without him, said Mr. Sisulu, the freeing of the others "is only a half-measure."
President F.W. de Klerk released the ANC men -- along with one of the founding members of the Pan Africanist Congress, a rival liberation group -- as part of his efforts to create a climate of trust and peace in which his government can begin negotiations with black leaders over a new constitution aimed at giving blacks a voice in national government.
But Pretoria may instead be creating a climate for more turmoil and uncertainty in this racially divided country.
As other repressive governments, particularly Poland and the Soviet Union, have recently discovered, initial steps to open up society can create a momentum for radical change that becomes difficult, if not impossible, to control.
As the days go by, the South African government will be ever more hard pressed to justify the continued imprisonment of Mr. Mandela as well as the continued banning of the ANC and enforcement of the state of emergency.
If it doesn't yield on these matters, and eventually begin talking directly to the ANC, the expectations and promise raised by yesterday's releases will turn to disillusionment and unrest.
If it does, the large number of right-wing whites, who oppose any concessions to the black majority, will step up their agitation and threats to take matters into their own hands.
The newly released ANC leaders also will be under enormous pressure.
The government is watching closely to see if their presence in the townships leads to increased anti-government protests and violence; if it does, Pretoria will use this as a reason to keep Mr. Mandela behind bars.
Pretoria hasn't forgotten why they were all sentenced to life imprisonment in the first place: for sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government.
In addition, the government is figuring that the releases could create a split between the internal and external wings of the ANC and between the newly freed leaders and those activists who have emerged as leaders inside the country during their imprisonment.
In order to head off any divisions, Mr. Mandela, in a meeting with his colleagues before they were released, instructed them to report to the ANC headquarters in Lusaka as soon as possible.
The men also will be faced with bridging the generation gap between themselves and the country's many militant black youths, the so-called young lions who are anxious to see the old lions in action.
Says Peter Mokaba, president of the South African Youth Congress: "We will be expecting them to act like leaders of the ANC."
They never considered themselves to be anything else.
At last night's rally, they called on their followers to be firm, yet disciplined, in their opposition to apartheid.
"We emphasize discipline because we know that the government is very, very sensitive," said Andrew Mlangeni, another early Umkhonto leader who is now 63.
"We want to see Nelson Mandela and all our comrades out of prison, and if we aren't disciplined we may not see them here with us."
We don't know who is winning the drug war in Latin America, but we know who's losing it -- the press.
Over the past six months, six journalists have been killed and 10 kidnapped by drug traffickers or leftist guerrillas -- who often are one and the same -- in Colombia.
Over the past 12 years, at least 40 journalists have died there.
The attacks have intensified since the Colombian government began cracking down on the traffickers in August, trying to prevent their takeover of the country.
The slaughter in Colombia was very much on the minds of 450 editors and publishers from Latin America, the United States, the Caribbean and Canada attending the 45th general assembly of the Inter-American Press Association in Monterrey, Mexico, this week.
On Tuesday the conference got word of another atrocity, the assassination in Medellin of two employees of El Espectador, Colombia's second-largest newspaper.
The paper's local administrator, Maria Luz Lopez, was shot dead, and her mother wounded, while her car was stopped for a red light.
An hour later, the paper's circulation manager, Miguel Soler, was shot and killed near his home.
The drug lords who claimed responsibility said they would blow up the Bogota newspaper's offices if it continued to distribute in Medellin.
They bombed the Bogota offices last month, destroying its computer and causing $2.5 million in damage.
El Espectador has been a special target because of the extraordinary courage of its publisher and his staff.
At Monterrey, publisher Luis Gabriel Cano, although shaken by the murders, issued a statement saying: "We will not cease our fight against drug trafficking.
They want to terrify the press and in particular El Espectador because it has always been a torchbearer in this war."
This comes from a man whose brother, Guillermo, was murdered in 1986.
The publishers in Monterrey command no battalions, but they agreed to express their outrage with editorials in today's editions.
Many will use a common editorial.
A final statement yesterday said: "While some advances are being made in nations throughout the hemisphere, the state of press freedom in the Americas still must be regarded as grim as long as journalists and their families are subject to the crudest form of censorship: death by assassination."
The report charged that Panama's Manuel Noriega is not only in league with the drug traffickers but also is bullying the press as never before.
"Noriega has closed every independent newspaper, radio and television station and arrested, tortured or forced into exile a long list of reporters," the statement declared.
It added: "In Cuba, public enemy No. 1 of press freedoms in the hemisphere, repression of journalists both Cuban and foreign is worse than ever."
And in Nicaragua, promises of press freedom by the Sandinistas "have not materialized."
As it happens, the four countries cited, Colombia, Cuba, Panama and Nicaragua, are not only where the press is under greatest attack but also are linked by the drug trade and left-wing politics.
Noriega is close to Castro and may once have been his agent.
Sandinistas Thomas Borge and the Ortega brothers are Castro proteges; he backed their takeover of Nicaragua.
In Colombia, the drug-financed guerrillas trying to seize the country and destroy democracy include M-19, which Castro has clearly backed.
Robert Merkel, a former U.S. attorney handling drug indictments in Florida, doesn't think for a minute that Castro's much publicized trials of high officials engaged in the drug trade mean he has broken off with the Medellin drug cartel.
"If the cartel succeeds in blackmailing the Colombian authorities into negotiations, the cartel will be in control and Fidel can exploit his past relationships with them," he told the Journal's David Asman recently.
The struggle against the drug lords in Colombia will be a near thing.
This week, the government arrested Jose Abello Silva, said to be the fourth-ranking cartel leader.
He will probably be extradited to the U.S. for trial under an extradition treaty President Virgilia Barco has revived.
Later, another high-ranking trafficker, Leonidas Vargas, was arrested and 1,000 pounds of dynamite seized.
Mr. Barco has refused U.S. troops or advisers but has accepted U.S. military aid.
President Bush has agreed to meet within 90 days with Mr. Barco, President Alan Garcia of Peru and President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia to discuss the drug problem.
It might not be a bad idea to do that sooner, rather than later.
After the Panama fiasco, they will need some reassurance.
Certainly, the Colombian press is much in need of that.
