This Constitution hereby establishes a democratic regional state structure called” The Regional State of Oromia”
The Oromia Region is the uninterrupted territory inhabited by the people of the Oromo Nation and other peoples who made a choice to live in the Region, the borders of which are:
To the North - The Afar and the Amhara Regions,
To the South - The Region of the Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples and Kenya,
To the East - the Somali Region, and
To the West - the Benishangul-Gumuz, the Gambella Peoples Regions and the Sudan.
Notwithstanding, the provisions of Sub-Article (1) of this Article, the current borders of the Oromia Region may be reviewed having regard to the interests of the people of the Region and in due consultation with the concerned Regional States.
Where a border issue cannot be resolved in the manner specified under Sub-Article (2) of this Article, it shall be submitted to and de- cided by the House of the Federation in accordance with Article 48 of the Constitution of Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
The Flag and the Emblem of the Oromia Regional State shall symbolize and reflect the identity, sovereignty, unity, national pride, patriotism, owning history and the Economic tie. 
The region’s flag shall have the colors red at the top, white at the middle and black at the bottom with the sign of Oda in the middle.
The Emblem of the Regional State shall have the symbol of Oda, Wheat and Factory Gear within itself.
Details of the Flag and Emblem shall be determined by law.
Oromia Regional state shall have its own anthem, which reflects the long standing history of patriotism, justice, the hard-won victory achieved and the hope for a better life of the Oromo people. The details shall be determined by law.
Afaan Oromo shall be the working language of the Regional State; it shall be written in the Latin alphabet.
Adama shall be the capital city of the Regional State of Oromia.
Provisions of this constitution set out in the masculine gender shall also apply, mutatis mutandis to the feminine gender.
Sovereign power in the Region resides in the people of the Oromo Nation and the sovereignty of the people is exercised through their elected representatives and through direct democratic participation.
Without prejudice to the supremacy of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia:
This Constitution is the supreme law of the Regional State. 
Any law, customary practice or any act of an agency of government or official that contravenes the provisions of this Constitution is null and void.
Residents of the Region, government organs, political organizations and other associations as well as their officials have the duty to ensure observance of this constitution and to obey it.
It is prohibited to assume state power in any manner other than that provided under this constitution.
Human rights and freedoms, which are inherent in the dignity of the human person, are inviolable and inalienable.
Human and democratic rights of individuals and peoples shall be respected.
State and religion are separate.
There shall be no state religion.
The State shall not interfere in the affairs of any religion nor religion in state affairs.
The Regional State Government affairs shall be conducted transparently to the public.
An elected representative may be recalled where the electorate loses confidence in him; the procedure shall be determined by law.
A public official or an elected representative shall be accountable for any failure in his duties of office.
Legislative, executive and judicial organs of the Regional State at all levels shall have the responsibility and obligation to respect and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The fundamental rights and freedoms contained in this chapter shall be interpreted inconformity with the international human rights laws, humanitarian conventions and principles of other relevant international instruments that have been adopted by Ethiopia.
Every person has an inviolable and inalienable right to life, the security of person and liberty.
Every one has the rights to life; No one shall be deprived of his life except as a punishment for serious offence determined by law.
Everyone has the right to protection against bodily harm.
No one shall be deprived of his Liberty except in accordance with due process of law.
No one may be subjected to arbitrary arrest and no person may be detained with out a criminal charge or conviction against him.
Every one has the right to protection against cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
No one shall be held in slavery or servitude. Trafficking in human beings for whatever purpose is strictly prohibited.
No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labor.
For the purpose of Sub-Article (3) of this Article, the expression “forced or Compulsory labor” shall not include:
Any work to be done in the ordinary course of detention imposed according to the law or during conditional release from such detention;
In case of conscientious objectors, any service exacted in lieu of compulsory military service;
Any service exacted in case of an emergency or a calamity threatening the life or safety of the community; and,
Any voluntary economic or social service rendered voluntarily by the community within its locality.
Anyone arrested on a criminal charge shall have the right to be informed promptly of the particulars of the charges and the reasons of his arrest in a language he understands.
An arrested person shall be informed, in a language he understands, of his right to remain silent and shall further be notified that any statement he may give may be used as evidence against him in a court.
An arrested person shall appear before a court of law within the next 48 hours of his arrest. Such time shall not include the time reasonably required under the circumstances for the journey from the place of arrest to the court. On appearing before a court, he has the right to be given prompt and specific explanation of whether there are sufficient reasons for his arrest due to the alleged crime committed.
Every one has an inalienable right to petition the court for a writ of habeaus corpus, a right no one can deny where the arresting police officer or any law enforcement body fails to bring him before a court of law and give the reasons for his arrest. The court may, where the interest of justice requires, order the arrested person to remain in custody or, when requested, remind him for no longer than the time required in order to carry out the necessary investigations aimed at establishing the facts. In determining additional time necessary for investigation, the court shall ensure that whether the responsible law enforcement authorities are carrying out investigation with diligence in order to guarantee the right of the arrested person to a speedy trial.
No one shall be compelled to make confessions or produce evidence, which could be used as evidence against him, and evidence obtained under coercion shall not be admissible.
An arrested person has the right to be released on bail. However, the court may, in exceptional cases prescribed by law, deny bail or demand adequate guarantee for the conditional release of the arrested person.
Everyone has a right to a public trial before an ordinary court of law within a reasonable time of having been charged. A court may hear cases in camera in order to protect the rights to privacy of the parties concerned, public morals or the security of the country or the Regional State.
An accused person shall have the right to be informed, with sufficient particulars of the charge made against him and to be given the charge in writing.
An accused person shall be presumed innocent and may not be compelled to testify against himself during his trial.
An accused person shall have a right to full access to any evidence presented against him to examine witnesses testifying against him, to adduce or to have evidence produced for his own defense and to obtain the attendance of and examination of his defense witnesses on his behalf before the court.
An accused person shall have the right to be represented by a legal counsel of his choice and if he doesn’t have sufficient means to pay for it and injustice would result otherwise, provide with legal representation at State expense.
An accused shall have a right to appeal to the competent court against any order or judgment he is not satisfied with.
An accused shall have the right to request for the assistance of an interpreter at state expense where the court proceedings are conducted in a language he does not understand.
A person in custody or imprisoned upon conviction shall have the right to treatments respecting his human dignity.
A detained or convicted prisoner shall have the right to the opportunity to communicate with and to be visited by his spouse, nearest relatives, friends, religious councilors, medical practitioners and lawyers.
No one shall be convicted of an offence on account of a commission or an omission, which was not considered as crime by law at the time of its commission or omission, nor shall a penalty, which is greater than the maximum penalty applicable, for that offense at the time of its omission or omission be imposed on him.
Not withstanding the provisions of Sub-Article (1) of this Article, a law enacted subsequent to the commission or omission of the offense shall apply where it favors the accused or convicted person.
No one shall be tried or punished twice for an offense for which he has been finally convicted or acquitted in accordance with criminal law and its procedure or any other relevant law.
Everyone has the right to the recognition everywhere of his status as a person.
Everyone has a right to respect for his human dignity, reputation and honor.
Everyone has the right to the free development of his personality compatible with the rights of other citizens.
All persons are equal before the law and are entitled, without any discrimination, to the equal protection of the law. In this respect, the law shall guarantee to all persons equal and effective protection without discrimination, on grounds of their nation, nationality, race, color, sex, language, religion, political or social origin, wealth, birth or other status.
Every one shall have the right to privacy. This right includes the right not to be subjected to searches of his home, person or property, or the seizure of his personal belongings.
Every one shall have the right to the inviolability of his correspondences and communications by means of postal letters, telephone, telecommunications and electronic devices.
Public Officials shall respect and protect these rights. They shall not interfere with and restrict the exercise of these rights except in compelling circumstances and in accordance with specific law which aim at safeguarding public security, safety, the prevention of crime, the protection of health, morals and the rights and freedoms of others.
Every one has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include the freedom to hold or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and the freedom, either individually in private or in fellowship with others, in public to manifest his religious worship, observance, practice and teaching.
Without prejudice to Article 90 (2) of the Federal constitution, believers may establish institutions of religious education and administration in order to propagate and organize their religion. A person’s free choice of his belief shall not in anyway be constrained or prohibited.
Parents and other guardians shall have the right to provide religious and moral education to their children.
Freedom to express or manifest one’s religion or belief may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health, education, morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, and in order to ensure the separation of government from religion.
There shall be no period of limitation on persons charged with crimes against humanity, as provided for by international conventions ratified by Ethiopia and other laws of Ethiopia such as genocide, summary executions, and forcible disappearances or in human punishments. Such crimes shall not be subject to amnesty or pardon by the legislature or any other organ of the state.
Everyone has the right to hold opinion without interference.
Everyone has a freedom of expression without any interference. This freedom shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds within or out of the Region, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art of through any media of his choice.
Freedom of the press and other media as well as of artistic creativity is guaranteed. 
Freedom of the press shall specifically include the following; Prohibition of any form of censorship; Access to information of public interes.
In the interest of the free flow of information, ideas and opinions that are essential to the functioning of a democratic system the press shall, as an institution, enjoy legal protection to ensure its operational autonomy and its capacity to entertain diverse opinions.
Medias financed by or under the control of the Regional state shall be administered in such a way as to ensure diversity in the expression of opinion.
These rights may be limited only through laws which are guided by the principle that freedom of expression and information may not be limited on account of the content or effect of the point of view expressed. Legal limitations may be laid down in order to protect the well being of youth and the honor and reputation of other individuals. War propagandas as well as public expression of opinion intended to injure human dignity shall be forbidden by law.
Any person who violates any legal limitations on the exercise of these rights may be held liable under the law.
Everyone has the right to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed, and to petition. 
Appropriate procedures may be prescribed in the interest of public convenience relating to the location of open-air meetings and the route of movement of demonstrators or when such a meeting or a demonstration is in progress, for the protection of public morality, peace, and democratic rights during such a meeting or demonstration.
This right does not exempt from liability under laws enacted in order to protect the well being of youth and the honor and reputation of individuals as well as under laws prohibiting war propaganda and the public expression of opinions intended to injure human dignity.
Everyone has the right to freedom of association of any purpose organizations formed in violation of appropriate laws, or to illegally subverting law and order or the constitutional status quo, or which promote such activities are prohibited.
Without prejudice to Article 32 of the Federal Constitution, any resident or person who lawfully stays in the Region has the right to freedom of movement and freedom to choose his residence, work, acquire or own property as well as the freedom to leave the region at any time he wishes to.
Any Ethiopian resident in the Region and who speaks the working language of the Region has the right to be elected or employed to any public office in the region.
Men and women, who have attained marriageable age as defined by law, have the right to marry and to found a family without any limitation on race, nationality or religion. They are entitled to equal rights at the time of the conclusion of marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. 
Laws shall be enacted to protect the interests and rights of children at the time of divorce.
Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
The family is the natural and fundamental unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the state.
Laws may be enacted recognizing the validity of marriage concluded in accordance with religious or customary practices.
This Constitution shall not preclude adjudication of personal and family disputes by religious or customary laws where the parties to the dispute agree. Particulars shall be determined by law.
Women shall have the right to equality with men in the enjoyment and protection of rights provided for by this constitution.
Women are entitled to equality with men in marriage as prescribed by this constitution.
Taking into account the historical legacy of the oppression, inequality and discrimination suffered by women, they are entitled to remedial and affirmative measures. 
The purpose of such measures shall be to provide special attention to women so as to enable women to compete and participate on the basis of equality with men in political, economic and social life, and to gain access to opportunities and positions in public and private institution.
The state shall enforce the rights of women to be relieved and protected from harmful customs. Laws, customs and practices that oppress or cause physical or psychological harm to women are prohibited.
Women shall have a right to equality in employment promotion, equal payment and the transfer of pension entitlements.
Women employed in government or private undertaking Have the right to maternity leave with full pay. 
The duration of maternity leave shall be determined by law taking into account the nature of the work, health of the mother and welfare of the child and the family;
Maternity leave may, in accordance with procedures prescribed by law, include prenatal leave with full pay.
To prevent harm arising from bearing or giving birth to a child and in order to safeguard their health, women shall have the right to education, information and to means that could enable them to plan their families.
Women have the right to participate in the formulation of national development policies, the execution of projects, and full consultation in the preparation of projects, particularly, those affecting the interests of women,
Women have the right to acquire, administer, control, transfer and benefit from property; In particular, they have equal rights with men with respect to the use, administration and transfer of land. 
They shall also enjoy equal treatment in the inheritance of property.
Every child have the right to life, to a name and nationality, to know, and be cared for, by his parents or guardians, not to be subjected to exploitative lab our practices, neither to be required nor permitted to perform work, which is hazardous or harmful to his education, health or well-being, to be free of corporal punishment or cruel and inhumane treatment in schools and other institutions responsible for the care of children.
In all actions concerning children undertaken by government organs or private institutions of social welfare, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the primary consideration shall be the best interest of the child.
Juvenile offenders, juveniles admitted to corrective or rehabilitative institutions, juveniles who become wards of the state or juveniles in public or private orphanages shall be kept separately from adults.
Children born out of wedlock shall have the same status and rights as children born in wedlock.
The state shall accord special protection to orphans and encourage the establishment of special institution to promote their adoption. 
It shall also support institution that provide for their welfare, up bringing and education.
Every person has the right to bring justiciable matters to, and to obtain a decision or judgment by a court of law or where appropriate by another body with a judicial power.
The decision or judgment referred to under sub-article (1) of this Article, may also be sought by: An association acting in the interest of its members, A person who is a member or representative of a group of persons with shared or similar interests.
Every resident of the Region without any discrimination based on their nationality, race, color, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion has the right and the opportunity:
To take part in the conduct of public administration affairs directly or through freely chosen representatives; Subject to the provisions of Article 33 of this constitution, to elect when he attains the full age of eighteen years and to be elected when he attains the full age of twenty-one.
To elect or be elected to any government office; elections shall be by universal suffrage and special requirements of the organization.
Participation in political parties, labour union, trade organizations, employer and professional associations shall be free and accessible to those who meet the general and special requirements of the organization. 
Elections to positions of responsibility within any of the organizations referred to under Sub Article 2 of this Article shall be conducted in a free and democratic manner.
The provisions of Sub-Articles (2) and (3) of this Article shall apply to mass organizations which significantly affect the public interest.
The Oromo People has unconditional right to self-determination, including the right to secession, as enshrined in the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. To this end, the people of the Oromo Nation:
Shall have the right to maintain and get respected their national identity, to preserve and promote their history and heritage, to speak, develop and make use, in any other manner, of their own language and to express their culture;
Shall have the right to a full measure of self-government in the territory inhabited by them and to an equitable representation in the state structure of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
The right of the people of the Oromo Nation to self-government shall also include the establishment of government structures in the territory habited by them and to a fair representation in the Federal Administrative Structures.
Shall exercise their right to self-determination, including secessions, where they are convinced that the right mentioned under Sub-Articles  (1), (2) and (3) of this Article have been violated, suspended or encroached upon and when such cannot be remedied under the auspices of a union with other peoples.
The excise of the right to self-determination, including cession, of the people of the Oromo Nation is subject to the following procedures: (a) When the demand for secession is approved by a two thirds majority vote of the members of the ‘Caffee’; When the Federal Government has made arrangements for a referendum to the people of the Oromo Nation within three years from the time it received the decision of the ‘Caffee’; When the demand for secession is supported by a majority vote in the referendum: When the Federal Government has transferred state power to the ‘Caffee’ and (e) When the division of assets is effected in accordance with a law enacted for that purpose,
For the purpose of this constitution, the expression “the people of the Oromo Nation” shall be construed as meaning those people who speak the Oromo language, who believe in their common Oromo identity, who share a large measure of a common culture as Oromo’s and who predominantly inhabit in a contiguous territory of the Regional State.
Every resident of the Region has the right to the ownership of private property. This right shall include the right to acquire, use and dispose of such property by means of sale of bequest or other means of transfer subject to the limitations prescribed by law in the public interest and in a manner compatible with the right of other persons.
“Private Property” for the purpose of this Article, means any tangible or intangible product produced by communities specifically empowered by the law to own property in common.
The right to ownership of rural and urban lands as well as all natural resources is excursively vested in the State and the people of the Region.
Land belongs to the people of the Region and shall not be subject to sale or any other mode of transfer of ownership.
Any farmer of the Region shall have the right to obtain, without payment, the use of land and shall not be dispossessed thereof. The details shall be specified by law.
Pastoralists of the Region have the right to free land for grazing and cultivation as well as the right not to be evicted from the lands they traditionally hold. The details shall be specified by law.
Without prejudice to the public ownership of land the Government of the Region may grant use of land to investors on the basis of payments to be fixed by law.
Any person shall have the full right to the immovable property he builds and to the improvements he makes on the land by labour or capital. 
This right shall include the right to alienate, bequeath, and where right of use expires, to remove his property or claim compensation for it.Particulars shall be determined by law.
The Government of the Region shall have the power to expropriate, in the public interest, private property. In all such cases, it shall pay compensation in advance commensurate to the expropriated property.
Every resident of the Region or every Ethiopian citizen who lives or wants to live in the Region has the right to engage freely in any economic activity and to pursue a livelihood any where in the Region.
Every resident of the Region has the right to choose his means of livelihood, occupation and profession.
Every resident of the Region has the right to equal access to government owned social services.
The State of the Region has the obligation to allocate ever-increasing resources to provide public health, education and other social service
The State of the Region shall allocate, within the available means, resources to provide rehabilitation and assistance to the physically and mentally disabled, the aged, and to children who are left without parents or guardians.
The State of the Region shall pursue policies, which aim at expanding job opportunities for the unemployed and indigent and shall accordingly undertake programmes and public work projects.
The Government of the Region shall undertake all measures necessary to increase opportunities for residents to find gainful employment
Farmers and pastoralists of the Region have the right to receive fair prices for their products that would lead to improvement in their conditions of life and to enable them to obtain an equitable share of the national wealth commensurate with their contribution. 
The Government of the Region shall be guided by these objectives in the formulation of policies of economic and social development.
The Government of the Region has the responsibility to protect and preserve historical and cultural legacies and to contribute to the promotion of the arts and sports.
Factory and service giving establishment workers, farmers, farm labourers, other rural workers and government employees under a certain level of responsibility whose nature of work allow them have the right to form associations to protect and improve their conditions of work and economic well-being. This right includes the right to form trade unions and other associations to bargain collectively with employers or other organizations.
Categories of persons referred to in paragraph (a) of this Sub-Article have the right to express grievances and to strike.
Government employees who enjoy the rights provided for under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Sub-Article shall be determined by law.
Women workers have the right to equal pay for comparable work.
Labourers have the right to reasonable limitation of working hours, rest, leisure, and periodic holidays with pay, remuneration for public holidays as well as to a healthy and safe work environment.
Without derogating from the rights recognized under Sub-Article (1) of this Article, laws shall be enacted to establish procedures for the formation of such associations and unions and for the regulation of the bargaining process.
The peoples of the Region have the right to protect and develop their environment, improve their living standards and sustainable development.
All the peoples of the Region have the right to participate in Regional development and, in particular, to be consulted in respect to policies and projects affecting their community.
The aim of development policies and programmers shall be to enhance the capacity of residents of the Region for development and meet their basic needs.
All residents of the region have the right to a clean and healthy environment
All the residents of the Region who have been displaced or whose livelihoods have been adversely affected as a result of state programmers have the right to commensurate monetary or other means of compensation, including relocation with adequate assistance by the State.
The Administrative structure of the Oromia Regional State consists of the Regional Government, Zones, Districts and Kebeles, However, ‘Caffee’ Oromia may establish other administrative structures as may be necessary.
Legislative power in the Oromia Regional State is vested in ‘Caffee’ Oromia. It shall be the supreme organ of the Regional State and shall be responsible to the electorate of the Region.
The highest executive power of the Regional State is vested in the Administrative Council of the Region, which shall be responsible to ‘Caffee’ Oromia.
Judicial power of the Regional State is vested only in the courts of the Region.
All state powers and functions not expressly given to the Federal State or to both Federal and Regional state by the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia shall be assumed by the Oromia Regional State
Without prejudice to Sub-Article (1) of this Article, the Regional state shall: Formulate and implement policies, strategies and plans for economic and social development of the Region; Enact and enforce the Constitution and other laws of the Region; Administer land and other natural resources of the Region in accordance with the laws enacted by the Federal State; Establish a Regional state structure, build a democratic order under the rule of law, and preserve, uphold and defend the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and this Constitution, Enact and implement laws on matters pertaining to the administration and conditions of work of civil servants of the Region taking into account the Federal state standards on education training and experience required for any public position.
Establish and administer a State police force and maintain public order and peace within the Region; Without prejudice to Article 28 Sub Article 1 of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and Article 28 of this Constitution grant pardon and or amnesty according to the law; Levy and collect taxes on revenue sources allocated to the Region as well as draw up, approve and administer the Regional state’s budget; Levy and collect income taxes on employees of the state and of private enterprises; Determine and collect fees for land usufructuary rights; Levy and collect taxes on income from agricultural activities; Levy and collect taxes on income derived from private dwelling houses and other private properties in the Region as well as collect rent on houses and other properties owned by the Regional Government; Levy and collect profit, sales, excise and personal income taxes on income of enterprises owned by the state.
Jointly with the Federal Government; Levy and collect profit, income and sales and excise taxes on enterprises they jointly establish; Levy and collect taxes on profits of corporations and on dividends paid to share holders; Levy and collect taxes on incomes derived from large-scale mining, petroleum and gas operations as well as royalties. Determine and collect fees and charges relating to licenses issued and services rendered by state organs; Fix and collect royalty fees for use of forest resources; Proclaim a state of emergency in the Region, should natural disaster or epidemics that jeopardize the well being or the health of the people occur.
Members of the ‘Caffee’ shall be elected for terms of five years on the basis of universal suffrage and by direct, free and fair election held by secret ballot.
‘Caffee’ members shall be elected from candidates in each electoral constituency a plurality of the votes cast.
Members of the ‘Caffee’ are representatives of the peoples of the Region as a whole. They shall be guided: The Constitution; The will of the people; and Their conscience.
No member of the ‘Caffee’ shall be charged with an offence on account of the vote he casts or opinion he expresses in the session of the ‘Caffee’ nor shall any administrative action be taken against him on such grounds.
No member of the ‘Caffee’ shall be arrested or charged with a crime without permission of the ‘Caffee’ unless he is apprehended in flagrante delicto for a serious offence.
Any member of the ‘Caffee’ may be removed in accordance with the law, upon loss of confidence by the electorate.
The ‘Caffee’ shall have legislative power in accordance with this constitution.
Subject to the relevant provisions of the Federal Constitution. ‘Caffee’ be the supreme political organ of the Region with full powers in the affairs of the Region.
With out prejudice to the generality of Sub-Articles (1) and (2) of this Article, the ‘ ‘Caffee’ shall in particular have the powers and duties to: Enact various laws consistent with the Federal constitution and other laws in accordance with this constitution;Establish additional administrative structures on the basis of the 	 number of population, area and socio-economic activities; Subject to the power vested in the Federal government, approve agreement that could be made with neighboring Regions.Shall elect the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the ‘Caffee’ and establish permanent and ad-hoc committees; Elect the President of the Regional State from among the members of the ‘Caffee’; approve the appointment of members of the Regional Administrative Council; Establish the auditing and inspection organ of the Region In accordance with the law grant amnesty; (h) Organize Police and 	 Security forces for maintenance of peace and security of the Region; Approve social and economic policies, strategies and plans of the Region; Enact laws on matters pertaining to the revenue of the Region approve the Regional budget; Establish institutions necessary for expanding social service and fastening economic developments; Appoint the President and Vice President of the Supreme Court and Auditor- General of the Region; Levy taxes and duties on revenue sources allocated to the Regional Government; Enact laws on the administration and working conditions of the civil service of the Region; Proclaim a state of emergency in accordance with Article 47 Sub-Article 2(q) of this Constitution; Issue regulations which help implement Federal and Regional Constitutions, Proclamations and other laws in the Region; Call and question the President and other Regional officials; investigate performances of the Regional Administrative Council;
‘Caffee’ shall have speaker and Deputy Speaker and establish as Standing and Ad- hoc committees as it deemed necessary.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the ‘Caffee’ shall be elected from among its members upon the recommendation of the winning Political party or parties.
The Speaker shall:
Call ordinary and extraordinary meetings of the ‘Caffee’ and preside over.
Direct general administrative affairs of ‘Caffee’
Enforce disciplinary actions ‘ Caffee’ takes on its members.
The Deputy Speaker shall:
Carry out responsibilities which shall be specifically entrusted to him by the Speaker;
Act on behalf of the speaker in his absence.
Other duties of the speaker shall be determined by law.
The ‘Caffee’ shall meet at least twice every year.
‘Caffee’ members shall be elected for a term of five years. 
At least one month prior to the expiry of the term of office, election shall be concluded for a new ‘Caffee’. 
The new ‘Caffee’ starts its function within fifteen days after the expiry of the tenure of previous ‘Caffee’
The speaker may call an extra ordinary meeting of the ‘Caffee’ when it is not in session. 
The Speaker shall also be obliged to call an extra ordinary meeting of ‘Caffee’ at the request of more than one third of the members.
Meetings of the ‘Caffee’ shall be open to the public. 
However, ‘Caffee may hold a closed meeting where the members of ‘Caffee’ or the Regional Administrative Council requests such meeting and where the request is approved by more than half members of ‘Caffee’
The presence of more than two third of the members of ‘Caffee’ shall constitute a quorum.
Decisions of ‘Caffee’ shall be made by a majority vote of the members present and voting.
The ‘Caffee’ shall adopt rules and procedures regarding its working pro	 cedures and legislative process.
The highest Executive Power of the Regional State is vested in the President and the Administrative Council of the Regional Government.
For all decisions they may pass on the affairs of the State, members of the Regional Administrative Council shall bear collective responsibility.
The Regional Administrative Council comprises the President, the Vice President, Bureau heads and other members as determined by law.
The President is the chairman of the Regional Administrative Council.
The Regional Administrative Council is accountable to the President and ‘Caffee’ of the Region.
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Federal Constitution, the Regional Administrative Council shall have the following powers and duties.
Ensure the implementation of laws adopted and passed by the ‘Caffee’ and Federal Government.
Determine the number of the members of the Regional Administrative Council as fixed by law; organize and oversee other executive organs and undertakings;
Prepare and submit to the ‘Caffee’ the annual budget and upon approval implement the same;
Devise economic and social policies and strategies; submit draft laws to the ‘Caffee’ and upon approval, implement the same;
Ensure the observance of law and order in the Region;
Enact regulations pursuant to powers vested in it by the ‘Caffee’;
Without prejudice to the power vested in ‘Caffee’ by Article 49 Sub-Article 3(o) of this Constitution, when ‘Caffee’ is not in session, proclaim a state of emergency and implement the same should natural catastrophes or epidemics that jeopardize the well being or the health of the people occurs.
Appoint Officials, Zonal Administrators and Deputy Administrators, recommended according to Article 57 Sub-Article (3) (e) of this Constitution.
Discharge other functions as assigned to it by the ‘Caffee’.
The President shall be designated by the ‘Caffee’ from its members, upon the nomination by a political party or a coalition of political parties with the majority vote in the ‘Caffee’.
Unless otherwise provided for in this Constitution; the term of office of the President shall be that of the ‘Caffee’.
The President shall be the Chief Executive of the Regional State and the Chairman of the Administrative Council.
The President is accountable to the ‘Caffee’
Without prejudice to Sub-Article (1) of this Article, the President Shall:
Lead the Regional Administrative Council, coordinate and represent the same;
Follow-up the implementation of policies, regulations, directives and decisions adopted by the Regional Administrative Council;
Submit for approval to the ‘Caffee’ the President and Vice President of the Supreme Court the Auditor General and Members of the Regional Administrative Council;
Without prejudice to this Sub-Article (c) when the ‘Caffee is not in session, assign temporarily the above mentioned officials;
Submit the names of heads and deputy heads of high economic, social and administrative establishments and Zonal Administrators posts other than those specified under Sub-Article (c) of this Article to the Regional Administrative Council for appointment,
Direct and supervise the security and police forces of the Region established to ensure the observance of law and order.
Lead, coordinate and supervise the activities of Zone, District and Kebele Administrative Councils.
Submit to the ‘Caffee’ periodic reports on the situation of the Region, work accomplished by the Regional Administrative Council as well as on its plans.
Grant pardons according to the law,
Respect and enforce the Constitution;
Discharge such other duties assigned to him by the ‘Caffee’.
The Vice President Shall:
Carry out duties entrusted to him by the President and the Regional Administrative Council of the Regional Government.
Act on behalf of the President in his absence.
The Vice President shall be accountable to the President.
The President shall have his own office in order to accomplish his powers and duties.
The Office of the President shall also be the Office of the Regional Administrative Council.
The Office shall be led by the Secretary assigned by the President.
The Secretary shall be accountable to the President and shall:
Organize the Office with man power and materials;
Serve as a custodian of the documents of the Regional Administration;
Ensure the proper handling of minutes of the Regional Administrative Council;
Discharge such other functions assigned to him by the President.
There shall be established bureau, commissions and other organs to execute, coordinate and guide the economic, social and administrative functions of the Region as may be necessary. The details shall be determined by law.	
An independent judiciary is here by established in the Region.
Special or ad-hoc courts which make judicial powers outside the regular court system or institutions legally empowered to exercise judicial functions and which do not follow legally prescribed procedures shall not be established.
Pursuant to Sub-Article 5 of Article 34 of this Constitution, religious and customary courts may be established or recognition be given to them.
Religious and customary courts that had state recognition and functioning prior to the adoption of this constitution shall be organized on the basis of recognition accorded to them by this Constitution.
Judicial power of the Region shall be vested only in the courts.
Courts at all levels shall be free from interference or influence of any official or organ of government or any other source.
Judges shall exercise their judicial functions in full independence and shall be directed solely by the law;
No judge shall be removed from his duties against his will before he reaches the retirement age fixed by law except under the following condition.
When the Judicial Administration Commission decides to remove him for violation of disciplinary rules or on grounds of gross incompetence or inefficien cy; or When the Commission decides that a judge can no longer carry out  his responsibilities on account of illness; and
When the ‘Caffee’ approves by a majority vote decision of the Judicial Administration Commission.
Pursuant to sub Article 4 of this Article, if the Judicial Administrative Commission believes that the judge has violated disciplinary rules, the judge shall be suspended from his judicial function until ‘Caffee’ decides the case.
The retirement age of any judge may not be extended.
The judicial organs of the Region shall be the State Supreme Court, zonal high Courts and the District Court.
The state Supreme Court:
Shall have the highest and final power of jurisdiction over state matters;
May exercise Federal High Court jurisdiction over Federal matters and
Shall also have the authority to review by way of cassation a final decision of any Regional court to correct a fundamental error of law.Details shall be decided by law.
In addition to its jurisdiction on Regional matters, High Courts may exercise Federal First instance Court jurisdictions.
Decisions of High Courts of Zonal Administrations given in lieu of Federal first- instance jurisdictions shall be appealable to the state supreme court.
Decisions of the State Supreme Court given in lieu of Federal High 	 Court jurisdictions may be appealable to the Federal Supreme Court.
District judicial organ shall be the lowest court of the Regional State exercising first instance jurisdiction in state matters.
The Regional Supreme Court shall prepare and submit the budget of the Regional Courts to the ‘Caffee’ and administer the same upon approval.
Expenses incurred by State Courts in the exercise of delegated Federal jurisdictions shall be borne by the Federal Government.
The President and Vice President of the State Supreme Court shall upon recommendation by the President of Regional Government, be appointed by the ‘Caffee’.
Judges of the State Supreme Court, High Court and District Court shall be appointed by the ‘Caffee’ upon submission of nominees by Regional Judicial Commission.
Before submission of names of nominees to the ‘Caffee’, the Regional Judicial Administration Commission shall obtain the views of the Federal Judicial Administration Commission on nominees and forward those views, along with its own recommendation, to the ‘Caffee’. Where the Federal Judicial administration Commission does not present its views within three months, the ‘Caffee’ may approve the appointment.
Regional Judicial Administration Commission, whose majority members are judges, shall be established in the Region.
The President of the State Supreme Court shall preside over the meetings of the Commission.
Details of the Commission’s members as well as powers and duties shall be determined by law.
Any Constitutional dispute shall be decided by Constitutional Interpretation Commission, which comprises a representative nominated from each District council.
Constitutional Interpretation Commission shall within sixty days of its receipt of recommendation from Council of Constitutional Inquiry, give decision on a constitutional disputes submitted to it.
Terms of office of the Commission shall be five years.
The Commission shall elect its own chairman and secretary from among its members. It shall get the necessary secretarial and financial support from ‘Caffee’.
The Regional Constitutional Inquiry Council is hereby established.
The Constitutional Inquiry Council shall have eleven members.
The President of the Regional Supreme Court - Chairperson;
The vice President of the Regional Supreme Court who shall be Vice-Chairperson;
Six capable and principled lawyers who shall be appointed by ‘Caffee’ on recommendation submitted by the President of the Regional Government on the basis of their professional excellence and moral standing, and
Three persons designated by the ‘Caffee’ whom the speaker shall submit for approval.
The Constitutional Inquiry Council shall have powers to investigate constitutional disputes. Should the council, upon consideration of the matter, find it necessary to interpret the constitution; it shall submit its recommendation thereon to the Regional Constitutional Interpretation Commission.
Where any law, regulation or directive issued by Regional State organs, is contested as being unconstitutional and such dispute is submitted to it by any court or interested party, the Council shall consider the matter and submit it to the Constitutional Interpretation Commission for final decision.
When issues of Constitutional Interpretation arise in court, the Council shall:
Remand the case to the concerned Court if it finds there is no need for constitutional interpretation; if dissatisfied with the decision of the Council, the interested party may appeal to the Constitutional Interpretation Commission.
Submit its recommendations to the Commission for a final decision if it believes that there is a need for Constitutional Interpretation.The decision of the Commission shall be final.
A Zone is an administrative unit below the Regional State comprising of certain districts.
Each zone shall be led by Administrator and Deputy Administrator.
Zonal Administration is an executive organ, which is established below the Regional Administrative Council.
Zonal Administration shall be accountable to the President of the Region and the Administrative Council.
A zonal Administration shall have the powers and duties to:
Coordinate the activities of the Districts of the Zone,
Support, follow up and coordinate the activities of the various Government institutions and departments of the Zone;
Support and coordinate social and economic institutions established to give services to more than one district;
Study the Zonal social services and economic development and submit it to the President and upon approval implement same;
Ensure the proper protection and preservation of the historical and cultural heritage as well as the natural resources of the Zone;
Submit periodic reports on the activities of the Zonal Administration to the President through its Administrator;
Ensure that law and order is maintained and peace and security of the people is protected in the Zone.
Ensure the proper implementation of policies, proclamations, regulations, directives and decisions made by the ‘Caffee’ and the Regional Administrative Council;
Discharge other functions assigned to it by the President and the Regional Administrative Council;
Administrator of a Zone shall be appointed by the Regional Administrative Council upon the recommendation of the President;
Unless otherwise provided, the term of office of the Chief Administrator of the Zone shall be the term of office of the President.
The administrator of the Zone shall direct the administration of the Zone and be accountable to the President.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the Administrator of the Zone shall:
Administer the Zone representing the President;
Follow, coordinate, receive report and support the activities of the various government departments and institutions in the Zone;
Direct and oversee the security and police forces established in the Zone to ensure the maintenance of law and order in the surroundings;
Coordinate the functions of other administrative organs working in the Zone; Submit periodic reports on government functions in the Zone to the President and the Regional Administrative Council; 
Discharge other functions assigned to him by the President and the Regional Administrative Council.
Zonal Deputy Administrator shall:
Act on behalf of the Administrator in his absence;
Carry out other functions, which shall be specifically entrusted to him by the Administrator.
The Deputy Administrator shall be accountable to the Administrator of the Zone.
The accountability of the office of the Zonal Administration shall be to the Administrator and shall be led by a head.
Duties and responsibilities given to the head of the Office of the President may also apply to the head of the Office of the Zonal administration as may be necessary.
District Administration shall have the following organs: District Council; District Administrative Council; District Judicial Organ.
District Council is a Council organized bellow the ‘Caffee’;
District Council shall:
Be a council comprising of the representatives of the people in each Kebele;
Designate Speaker and Deputy Speaker from among the members of the political party or a coalition of political parties that have majority vote upon recommendation by the same;
Establish permanent and ad hoc committees as may be necessary.
Members of District Council shall be elected directly by the people from residents of each Kebele found in the District.
Accountability of the District Council members shall be to their electorate.
A District council shall be the highest Government organ of the District.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the Council shall have the powers and duties to:
Deliberate upon and approve plans and programs with regard to economic development, social services and public administration of the District:;
Oversee that activities of basic agricultural development is undertaken within the time set and natural resources development, preservation and maintenance is accomplished by giving due attention to it in the District.
Create conducive situations to mobilize and activate the populace for development activities;
Elect Speaker and Deputy Speaker from among members of a political party or a coalition of political parties that constitutes a majority; appoint an administrator;
Approve the appointment of Deputy administrator and other officials upon recommendation by the administrator;
Adopt its internal rules of procedure;
Ensure the proper collection of land use taxes, agricultural products’ income taxes, and similar other taxes as determined by law;
Utilize revenues other than those that fall within the domain of the Regional State; deliberate upon and approve its budget;
Upon consulting the appropriate state organs, appoint other officials outside the jurisdiction of the District administration.
Issue directives and implement the same to ensure the maintenance of peace and security.
The Speaker shall have the responsibility to call and preside over the Council.
Power and duties assigned to the Speaker of ‘Caffee’ shall, mutatismutandis be the power and duties of the Speaker of District Council.
The Deputy Speaker shall:Carryout responsibilities, which shall be specifically entrusted to him by the Speaker of District Council;
Act on behalf of the Speaker in his absence.
A District Council shall meet every three months,
The presence of more than two third of the members shall constitute a quorum. Decision shall be made by majority vote.
The tenure of District Council shall be five years. New elections shall be held one month prior to the expiry of the tenure of previous Council.
The new Council begins its session within fifteen days after the expiry of the tenure of the previous Council.
Meeting of the District Council shall be public. The Speaker may call an extraordinary meeting when the Council is not in session. The Speaker is also obliged to call an extraordinary meeting at the request of more than one half of the members.
The District Council may have its own Office.
District Administrative Council shall be the executive organ of the District and is accountable to the Administrator and District Council.
District Administrative Council comprises the District Administrator, Deputy Administrator and also the Head, of the main sectoral executive offices found in the District.
District Administrative Council shall have the powers and duties to:
Implement the policies, laws, directives, plans and programs of the State in the District;
Coordinate, supervise and lead activities of executive organs found in the District; 
Prepare annual budget draft and submit it to the District Council, implement same upon approval;
Maintain peace and security in the district and direct the district police and security force as well as coordinate their function.
Prepare plans for social services, economic development and administration and submit same to the District Council for approval;
Protect, preserve and develop the natural resource; mobilize the populace for development activities;
Oversee that cultural heritage have the necessary preservation and protection;
Discharge other functions assigned to it by the District Council and Regional Administrative Council.
In the exercise of state function, members of the District Administrative Council shall be collectively responsible for their decisions.
The Administrator of the District shall be appointed by District council upon recommendation by a political party or a coalition of political parties that constitutes a majority in the Council.
Unless otherwise provided, the term of office of the District Administrator shall be that of the District Council.
District Administrator shall direct the Administration of the District and be accountable to the District Council and the President.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the Administrator shall:
Lead the Administrative Council of the District;
Ensure the proper implementation of polices, laws, directives and programs in the District;
Coordinate, lead and control functions of members of the District Administrative Council, various institutions and Kebeles within its domain;
Control that the District’s social services, and economic development programmes and plans are prepared with in the required time;
Direct and control the security and police forces in the enforcement of law and order;
Submit periodic reports to the District council and Zone Administration;
Discharge other functions assigned to him by the District Council and the President.
Deputy Administrator of the District shall;
Act on behalf of the Administrator in his absence;
Carry out function specifically entrusted to him by the administrator.
Deputy Administrator of the District shall be accountable to the Administrator.
District administration office shall be accountable to the Administrator and have a leader.
Functions and responsibilities entrusted to the office of the President in this Constitution, may apply to the office of the District Administration, as may be necessary.
Kebele shall have the following organs: Kebele Council; Kebele Administrative Council and Kebele Social Court.
Kebele Council is the highest government organ of the Kebele.
Members of Kebele Council shall be elected by Kebele residents directly.
The Kebele Council shall be accountable to the people of the Kebele and District Council.
The Kebele Council shall have the following powers and Duties.
Implement plans and directives adopted by District Council and District Administrative Council.
Issue directives and implement the same;
Appoint Kebele Administrator from among the Kebele Council members; organize Kebele Administrative Council.
Upon submission by the Kebele Administrator, approve the appointment of Keble Deputy Administrator and Social Court Judges.
Based on socio-economic development and administrative plans and programs, formulate programs of action for its proper implementation and oversee it.
Initiate any other programmes that may benefit residents of the Kebele, and supervise its implementation.
Mobilize the populace for development activities; supervise the proper development and protection of natural resources.
Ensure the maintenance of law and order in the Kebele.
Kebele Council shall be presided over by Speaker and Deputy Speaker appointed by the Kebele Council upon nomination by a political party or a coalition of political parties that have the majority vote.
The speaker shall preside over the Council; prepare agendas and ensure the proper handling of minuets and documents.
The Deputy Speaker shall carry out responsibilities, which shall be specifically entrusted to him by the Speaker; act on behalf of the Speaker in his absence.
Kebele Council shall meet every two month.
The presence of more than two third of members shall constitute a quorum. Decision shall be made by majority vote.
The tenure of Kebele Council shall be five years; new elections shall be completed one month prior to the expiry of its tenure. The new council begins its session within fifteen days after the expiry of the tenure of the previous Council.
Kebele Administrative Council is the lowest executive organ comprising the Kebele Administrator, Deputy Administrator and other members, as shall be determined by law.
Kebele Administration Council shall be accountable to the Kebele Council and District Administrative Council
Members of Kebele Administrative Council shall discharge their functions personally and collectively.
Members of Kebele Administrative Council shall be collectively responsible for decisions they make and their functions as member of the Council.
Kebele Administrative Council shall have the following powers and duties:
Prepare development plans and programmers, submit to the Kebele Council for approval and implement same;
Conduct activities for the protection, preservation and development of natural resources; coordinate and mobilize the populace for development activities;
Maintain peace and security in the keeled
Preserve historical and cultural heritages in the locality and forward suggestions for their utilization to the higher concerned organ;
Submit periodic reports to the Kebele Council on its activities
Carry out other functions assigned to it by the Kebele Council.
Kebele Administrative Council shall formulate programmes and evaluate its implementation on periodic meetings.
The Administrator of Kebele shall be appointed by Kebele Council upon recommendation by a political party or a coalition of political parties that constitutes a majority in the Council
Unless otherwise provided, the term of office of the Kebele Administrators shall be that of the Kebele Council.
The Administrator of Kebele shall be accountable to the Kebele Council and the Administrator of the District.
Without prejudice to sub-Article 1 of this Article the Kebele Administrator shall have the following powers and duties.
Convene and lead Kebele Administrative Council;
Ensure and control the implementation of policies, laws, regulations, directives, and programmes in the Kebele;
Submit candidates to the Kebele Council for appointment of social court judges;
Submit reports on its activities to the Kebele Council, to the people residing in the Kebele and to the District Administrative Council;
Discharge other functions assigned to him by Kebele Council, Kebele Administrative Council, and District Administrative Council.
Deputy Administrator shall be designated by the Kebele council upon recommendation by the Kebele Administrator from the residents of the Kebele.
Deputy Administrator shall:
Act on behalf of the Administrator in his absence;
Carry out responsibilities specifically entrusted to him by the Kebele Administrator.
The Deputy Administration shall be accountable to the Administrator of the Kebele.
Office of Kebele Administration shall be led by the Administrator of the Kebele.
Kebele Social Court is hereby established by this Constitution. 
Details shall be determined by law.
Judges of Social Courts shall be appointed according to Sub-Article 2 (c) of Article 98 of this Constitution.
The term of office of Social Court shall be the term of office of Kebele Council.
Any organ of Government shall, in the implementation of the Federal and Regional Constitutions, other laws and policies, shall be guided by the objectives specified in this Chapter.
The term “Government” in this Chapter shall mean the Government of the Oromia Region.
Guided by democratic principles, Government shall promote and support the people’s self-rule at all levels.
Government shall respect the identity of nations, nationalities and peoples. Accordingly, Government shall have the duty to strengthen ties of equality, unity and fraternity among them.
The Government shall:
Have the duty to formulate policies, which ensure that all residents ofthe region can benefit from the region’s legacy of intellectual and material resources.
Have the duty to ensure that all residents of the Region get equal opportunity to improve their economic conditions and to promote equitable distribution of wealth among them.
Provide special assistance to least advantaged areas in the Region.
Take measures to avert any natural and man-made disasters, and, in the event of disasters, provide timely assistance to the victims.
Have the duty to hold, on behalf of the people, land and other natural resources and to deploy them for their common benefit and development.
Promote, at all times, the participation of the people in the formulation of Regional development policies and programmes; it shall also have the duty to support the initiatives of the people in their development endeavors.
Have duty to mobilize the knowledge and financial capacity of all the residents of the region for rapid socio economic development. To this end, not only should it create positive conditions for the participation of the people in the formulation of policies and plans, but also in their implementation and follow-up.
Ensure the participation of women in equality with men in all economic and social development endeavors.
Endeavor to protect and promote the health, welfare and living standards of the working population of the region.
To the extent the country’s and Region’s resources permit, the Government shall aim to provide all residents access to public health, and education, clean water, housing, food and social security.
Education shall be provided in a manner that is free from any religious influence, political partisanship or cultural prejudices.
Government shall have the duty to support, on the basis of equality the growth and enrichment of cultures and traditions that are compatible with fundamental rights, Human dignity, democratic norms and ideas, and the provisions of the constitution.
Government and all residents shall have the duty to protect natural resources, historical sites and objects.
Government shall have the duty, to the extent its resources permit, to 	 support the development of arts, science and technology.
Government shall endeavor to ensure that all regional residents live in a clean and healthy environment.
The design and implementation of programmes and projects of development shall not damage or destroy the environment.
The people have the right to full consultation and to the expression of views in the planning and implementation of environmental policies and projects that affect them directly.
Government and residents of the Region shall have the duty to protect their environment.
The Regional Administrative Council shall have the power to decree a state of emergency should a natural disaster or and epidemic occur according to Sub-Article (7) of Article (55) of this Constitution when “Caffee” is not in session
Within fifteen days after the decree of state of emergency and enforcement by regional Administrative Council, the Speaker shall call an extraordinary meeting of the ‘Caffee’ for approval.
A state of emergency decreed by the Regional Administrative Council, if approved by Caffee can remain in effect up to six months. 
However, “Caffee” may allow by a two-third majority vote that the decree be renewed every four months successively.
In the exercise of emergency powers the Regional Administrative Council and “Caffee” cannot, however, suspend or limit the rights provided for in Article 15, 16,18 (1) and (2), 21(1), 24(1), 25, 27(1) and 39 of this Constitution.
‘Caffee’ while declaring a state of emergency, shall simultaneously establish a state of Emergency Inquiry Board, comprising of seven persons to be chosen and assigned by ‘Caffee’ from among its members and from legal experts. The Board shall be established at the time of the approval of the state of emergency.
The state of Emergency Inquiry Board shall have the powers and duties to:
Make public within one month the names of all individuals arrested on account of the state of emergency together with the reasons for their arrest;
Inspect and follow up that no measure taken during the state of emergency is inhumane;
Recommend to the President or to the Regional Administrative Council corrective measures if it believes that there is inhumane treatment;
Submit its view to ‘Caffee’ on a request to extend the duration of the state of emergency.
The Auditor General shall, upon recommendation of the Regional Administrative President, be appointed by the ‘Caffee’;
The Auditor General shall, audit and inspect the accounts of Bureaus and other offices of the Regional Government to ensure that expenditures are properly made for activities carried out during the fiscal year and in accordance with the approved allocations, and submit his reports thereon to the ‘Caffee’;
The Auditor General shall prepare and submit for approval to ‘Caffee’ his office’s annual budget;
The Auditor General shall be Accountable to ‘Caffee’;
The details of powers and duties of the Auditor General shall be determined by law.
Any proposal for Constitutional amendment shall be submitted to ‘Caffee’ for discussion and decision if supported by: One-third vote of members of ‘Caffee’; or A majority vote of Regional Government Administrative Council; or A one-third of District Councils in the Region; or A one-third of Kebele councils in the Region.
Provisions of Chapters two and three of this constitution may not be amended contrary to the conditions specified under Article 105 of the Federal Constitution.
All provisions of this Constitution other than those specified in sub Article 1 of this Article may be amended only in the following manner. When district Councils approve by a two-third majority vote; and When ‘Caffee’ approves by a majority vote of three fourth.
Sub-Article 2 of this Article shall be amended: When all District Council approve the proposed amendment; and When ‘Caffee’ approves it by a majority vote of three fourth.
The Oromo language version of this Constitution shall have final legal authority.
CONTENT
Regulation No. 4/2006
Regulation for issuance of Professional License for Auditors and Accountants that Works in Private or in Association 
Regulation No. 4/2006
Regulation for issuance of Professional License for Auditors and Accountants that Works in Private or in Association
Whereas, it is necessary to give the audit and accounting service exercised in our region should be conducted by professionals who are equipped with skill, knowledge and ethics required by such a profession;
Whereas, it is necessary to enhance the quality of the service by ensuring professional competence of auditors and accountants;
Whereas, it is necessary to expand the auditing and accounting coverage as the service demand of auditing and accounting in both governmental and private sectors is increasing along with the economic development of our country;
Whereas, it is necessary to confirm professional competence of those who seek to engage in this profession either privately or in groups and licensing them;
Whereas, it is necessary to follow up and control in order that there shall be precise accounting in governmental and private institutes as well as in associations in the region;
In Accordance with a Proclamation to Amend Proclamation No 90/2005 to Re Establish The Office of Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Proclamation No.154/2005 Article 26 Sub Articles 1 the following regulation is issued by the Council of Oromia Regional.
Part One
General Provisions
Short Title
This regulation may be cited as the ‘Regulation for the Issuance of Certificate of Professional Competence to Private Auditors and Accountants No.4/2014.
Definition
Unless the context requires otherwise in this regulation:
“Professional license” means a lcense issued to be certified auditors and accountants.
“Institutes” means legal institutes engaged in service delivery of trade and development activities.
“Audit Team” means a team which authorized to render auditing service and consists of 2 or more audit members on duty.
“Proclamation” means a Proclamtion to Amend Proclamation No 90/2005 to Re Establish the Office of Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Proclamation No. 154/2005.
“Office” means the Oromia Rgional State Auditor General Office.
“Individuals” means auditors or accountants who were organized either individually or in associations and are issued with professional license.
“Accountant” means an individual or organization holding accounting professional competency certificate to provide and engage in accounting activities.
“Authorized accountant” means an organization or individual authorized by the Office to render accounting service pursuant to this regulation.
“Level one authorized accountant” means an organization or individual authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes or offices found in all level pursuant to this regulation.
“Level two authorized accountant” means accountant who is authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 500,000,000 /five hundred million/.
“Level three authorized accoutant” means accountant who is authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes associations, unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 100,000,000 /one hundred million /.
“Level four authorized accoutant” means accountant who is authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 10,000,000 /ten million/.
“Auditor” means an organization or individual holding professional competence certificate that verifies accounting reports and recommends on the precision and completeness of such the report.
“Authorized Auditor” means an organization or individual authorized to render auditing service by the Office in accordance with this regulation.
“Level one authorized auditor”means an organization or individual authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes or offices found in all level pursuant to this regulation.
“Level two authorized auditor” means an auditor who is authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes associations, unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 500,000,000 /five hundred million/.
“Level three authorized auditor” means an auditor who is authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 100,000,000 /one hundred million/.
“Level four authorized auditor” means an auditor who is authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 10,000,000 /ten million/
“Association” means cooperative associations, cooperative unions,cooperative federation, development association, finance association, various professional associations,as well as any social association.
“Professional association” means accounting or auditing professional association that is recognized in regional, nationwide or internationally and accepted by the Oromia main auditor head office.
“Auditors’ professional assocition” means associations that met the criteria identified under this regulation, organized in accordance with Oromia region associations organization law, recognized by organizing entities and rendering auditing service in the region.
“Accountants’ professional association” means associations that met the criteria identified under this regulation, organized in accordance with Oromia region associations organization law, recognized by organizing entities and rendering accounting service in the region.
“Certificate” means evidence isued either by concerned body or the Office of the Oromia auditor General to verify the professional competency of auditors or accountants.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this regulation set out in the masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This regulation shall apply on matters regarding issuance, renewal suspension and cancellation of auditors and accountant professional license in Oromia National Regional State in accordance with article 7 sub article 13-16 of proclamation No. 154/2002.
Part Two
Requirment for Issuance of Professional Licencse Duty and Level
Responsibilities of an Authorized Auditor An authorized auditor shall have the following responsibilities:
Audits financial statements and issues recommendation,
Gives profession auditory advice,
Carries out all activities related to auditing duties under the level of authorization.
Criteria for the issuance of auditing professional license
He who is able to submit evidence,which certifies he has passed auditing professional competency examination from concerned body.
He who complements education direct work experience as well as field of study which are provided under articles 7-10 of this regulation.
He who fulfills the relevant preises, tools, capital and man power.
He, whose auditing or professional right is not cancelled or suspended.
He who has got professional license and who hadn’t received any evidence– backed complaints by customers or offices he had served in.
He who finalized his period of suspension if he had ever been suspended from doing auditing activities.
He who is able to confirm the professional competency of auditing professionals he has employed and could submit thereof.
The application of this article shall be defined by the upcoming procedure.
Level one authorized auditor
Competency certificate and accounting recognition from any recognized international association or organization of accountants, or certificate in public accounting with 2 years (two years) of experience in external auditing.
Level two authorized auditor 
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent eduction and 7 (seven) years of experience for external audit as well as9 (nine) years of experience for internal auditing.
M.A. degree and 5 (five) years of experience for external audit as well as 7 (seven) years of experience for internal auditing.
PhD and 3 (three) years of expeence for external audit as well as 5 (five) years of experience for internal auditing.
Level three authorized auditor
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent edutional level and 6 (six) years of experience for external audit or 8 (eight)years of experience in internal auditing,associations’ auditing, or as inspector in tax regulation and collection.
M.A. degree and 4 (four) years of experience for external audit as well as 6 (six) years of experience or internal auditing.
Level four authorized auditor
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent eduction and 0 (zero) years of experience and who is organized in associations by concerned body,
He who has participated in short term trainings given by Office and completed with good standing.
The application of this article shall be defined by the upcoming procedure
Part Three
Requirements for Issuance of Professional License Duty and Level Tasks to be done by Authorized Accountant
An authorized accountant shall have the following duties
Tax accounting tasks,
Extension of accounting and intnal controlling system,
Preparing budget plan,
Financial analysis,
Closing account,
Giving professional advice on accounting,
Preparing financial statement and
Carries out all activities related tonauditing tasks under level of authorization.
Criteria for the issuance of accounting professional license
He who is able to submit evidence,which certifies he has passed accounting professional competency examination from concerned body,
He who complements education,direct work experience as well as field of study which are provided under articles 13-16 of this regulation,
He who fulfills the relevant preises,tools, capital and man power,
He whose accounting professional right is not cancelled or suspended,
He who has got professional license and who hadn’t received any evidence backed complaints by customers or offices he had served in,
He who finalized his period of sus pension if he had ever been suspended from doing accounting activities,
He who is able to confirm the pro fessional competency of auditing professionals he has employed and could submit thereof and
The application of this article shall be provided by the upcoming directive.
Level one Authorized Accountant
Competency certificate and accounting recognition from any recognized international association or organization of accountants, or certificate in public accounting with 1 year (one year) of experience.
Level Two Authorized Accountant
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent eduction and 6 (six) years of experience in accounting or external and internal auditing or 5 (five) years of experience in internal auditing in an organization that practices joint accounting system or in any governmental office in higher position in finance or accounting or in both internal and external auditing or
M.A. degree and 4 (four) years of experience in external and internal auditing or as well as 3 (three) years of experience working in higher position in governmental office in finance or accounting or external and internal auditing or
PhD holder and who has taught accounting for 5(five) years in any recognized university and college that graduates students in accounting course (three) years of experience for external audit as well as 5 (five) years of experience for internal auditing or 
PhD and 2 (Two) years of experience in accounting or external and internal auditing or 1 (one) year of experience in internal auditing in an organization that practices joint accounting system or in any governmental office in higher position in accounting or in both internal and external auditing.
Level Three Authorized Accountant
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
Part Four
Institutes or offices in which an Organized or Individual Authorized Auditor or Accountant may work in
An auditor or an accountant who is authorized either individually or in group
May work in institutes listed below:
Governmental offices or
State developmental organizations or
Non-governmental organizations or
Cooperative federation or
Cooperative union or
Colleges in different level or
In basic cooperative associations or
Small and micro enterprises or
Private organization.
While the provision provided under sub article 1(a–i) is kept, agreement and power of attorney from the main auditor Office is needed in order to carry out auditing activities in governmental offices either individually or in organized.
General Duties
An authorized auditor or accountant shall only work on a level for which was issued professional license.
An authorized auditor or accountant shall work retaining the code of ethics needed for the profession.
An authorized auditor or accountant shall submit a comprehensive report and supportive documents when he is requested by Office regarding his activity in non-governmental and private organizations.
An authorized auditor or accountant shall, who was issued competency certificate from concerned body, shall be registered according to the trade law and obtain trade license from the concerned body to use the professional license he was issued by Office.
In order to check whether authorized auditors or accountants who are working in the region follow the code of ethics and receive legal fare for the service they render:
They shall submit audit and ac counting report of the institute or the private entity they have audited,
Number education and experience of their employees deployed for the job,
Audit report of their company,
Legal receipts,
They shall submit other relevant evidence up on request ,
It is strictly forbidden to carry out accounting or auditing activities privately in the region unless, in accordance with this regulation unless the application lodged by such a person to work as authorized accountant or auditor is reviewed, and professional license is issued by the Office,
An authorized auditor or ac countant shall only be issued professional license if and only if he knows the working language of the region,
The Auditor or the accountant shall carry out his task respecting both the country’s and the region’s constitutions and laws.
Authorized Auditors or Accountants who come from other Places
The Office registers authorized auditors and accountants who come from the federal or other regions with certificates, checks whether they meet relevant requirements as well as criteria and then may allow them to work in the region if such an Office believes they can work in the region.
The application of this article shall be provided by the upcoming directive.
Promotion of Authorized Auditor and Accountant
Authorized auditors and accountants may promote to the next step
The Office shall issue procedures on requirements that shall be met regarding promotion.
Change of Profession
If the authorized auditor or accountant desires to change his profession to auditing or accounting professions, he may submit his request to the Office.
Requirements those shall be met regarding change of profession shall be decided on the procedure to be set.
Part Five
Examination and Training
Examination
Any person who lodges request to obtain auditing or accounting profession license shall pass the professional competency examination.
The Office is entitled to reach an agreement with the concerned body regarding the professional competency examination issued by such an Office. Its execution shall be decided on the procedure to be set.
Training
The Office shall give a short term training on auditing for those who are interested and graduated with first degree from different higher learning institute in accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information systems or management or business management or business education or economics or cooperative accounting and auditing.
The main office shall give a short term training on accounting for those who are interested and graduated with first degree from different higher learning institute in accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information systems or management or business management or business education or economics or cooperative accounting and auditing.
If anyone who takes professional competency examination wants to take training, the Office may facilitate it.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the procedure to be set.
Part Six
Procedures of Issuance of Professional License for Auditors or Accountants who are working in Governmental offices and Desire to Work in Groups
Auditors or Accountants who want to be organized and Work
Auditors and accountants who meet the requirements provided in this regulation may be organized and render auditing and accounting service according to their level.
For auditors or accountants who want to be organized and render accounting and auditing service,they shall pass the professional competency examination if each of their members meets the requirements identified in this regulation.
If auditors or accountants who meet the criteria required to be organized in associations obtain,in accordance with Oromia Region organizational laws of associations, recognition from the organizing entity, they may receive professional license, and carry out their activities by notifying the Office.
Regarding Applicants who are in Working in Governmental Offices
Applicants who are in working in governmental offices can obtain professional license to work as an authorized accountant or auditor if they meet the requirements provided in this regulation.
Keeping the provision identified under sub article 1 of this article applicants who are in working in governmental offices shall provide with a clearance from the governmental office if they meet the criteria to work in this profession and want to get professional license.
Licensing Procedure
Any accountant or auditor who wants to engage in this profession can be issued with professional license if he meets the requirement provided in this regulation.
The auditing and accounting professional license supposed to be issued shall only be issued if it is approved by the auditor general.
Part Seven
Follow up, Renewal, Suspension, Cancellation and Renewal of Suspended Professional License
Follow up
The Office shall distinguish address and number of customers of those who are issued professional license and follow them up.
Their shall be multi functional follow up on the professional issued with accounting or auditing license to check whether such a professional is working in line with the code of ethics of accounting or auditing.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Renewal of Professional License
Any authorized individual or organized auditor or accountant,who received professional license from the Office, shall annually renew such a license.
The term of renewal is calculated within the first 3 months of each budge year from July 8 – October 10.
Circumstances in which Renewal of Professional License is Suspended
If auditing or accounting task is confirmed done beyond professional ethics;
If it is confirmed he doesn’t meet requirements or criteria of level of profession;
In case of an auditor who estab lished auditing company, his capital is confirmed insufficient for the task or he is confirmed he didn’t deploy competent professionals;
If such a license is not renewed within the prescribed time;
If he was found guilty of corruption or dishonesty by the authorized court;
If is confirmed mentally ill by physicians;
If he fails to notify his new address within 2 months;
If the Office confirms the accuracy of completes lodged by 3rd parties or customers backed by sufficient evidence;
If he doesn’t submit timely report on accounting and auditing activities for the concerned body;
If other reasons that shall effect on suspension of professional license are found;
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Conditions in which Professional License Becomes Invalid
If the holder dies or the association dissolves;
If the authorized auditor or ac countant is requested by letter to notify his address and he fails to do so for 1 year or so;
In accordance with article 9, if the reasons to suspend professional license are found serious and the renewal is believed insurmountable;
If he is found using the license for other professions he is not illegible to and this is confirmed by empirical evidence. In this case not only cancelling the license but it might cause legal charge.
Other cases that can cause to canceling the professional license
Conditions for the Renewal of Suspended Professional License
If the authorized auditor or accountant, whose professional license suspended, states in black and white that he has regretted and is ready to improve professional ethics, he may pay unpaid renewal and penalty fees and gets the license renewed.
In spite of the existence of the provision provided under article 28(2) of this regulation, he may renew his professional license by paying the required penalty if the Office finds the reason sufficient and acceptable.
Any accountant or auditor he who was allowed to execute the provisions stated under sub article 1 and 2 of this article should have been submitting evidence for his positive achievement of his accounting and auditing tasks from institutes or offices he rendered his service as well as providing timely report to Oromia Revenue Authority.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Appeal and Compliant Procedures
An inquiry and ethics committee that investigate compliant and submit the result along with recommendation to the auditor general shall be established.
The decision which is passed by the auditor general based on the provided recommendation shall be final decision.
If the accountant or the auditor or ganized individually or in association remains unsatisfied with the decision, his right of appeal is reserved according to the country’s or the region’s law.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Guilt and Penalty
An authorized auditor
Shall retains penal and civil responsibilities;
In accordance with Civil Procedural Code, he shall pay restitution for the loss caused by his mistakes.
Part Eight
Miscellaneous Provisions
Service Fee 
The authorized auditor or accountant shall pay service fee for the issuance of professional license. The term of payment shall be decided on the directive to be issued.
Deprivation 
Any one is strictly forbidden to carry out auditing and accounting tasks either individually or organizationally in Oromia Region without meeting the necessary requirements described in this regulation and obtaining professional license from the head office.
Address of the Organization
The authorized auditor or accountant shall have permanent address and should notify the head office his address.
The auditor or the accountant shall notify the Office all information about the organization.
Up on opening branch offices, the authorized auditor or accountant shall notify the Office.
Power to issue directives 
The Office may issue directives for implementation of this regulation.
Inapplicable laws
Any regulation and customary practice that are inconsistent with this regulation shall not be applicable.
Effective Date
This regulation shall come in to force as of its publication on Megelete Oromia.
Abdi Taha
Oromia National Regional State
Council Deputy Speaker
March, 2014
Finfine
Proclamation No 195/2015.A proclamation to Revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation NO 195/2015.
Whereas, it is found necessary to make the cities of the regional state to be centers of development, industry, technology, information and trade as well as comfortable centers for life in a modern way observing their level of development.
Whereas, it has become necessary to provide a condition by which the cities shall be structured and their power and duties be determined based on the constitutional principles of the rights of the people to self administration at different levels;
Whereas, it is found necessary to create a favorable condition which can speed up the development of the cities in the region by making their work procedures and structural organization to depend on the principle of good governance so as to enable them that by possessing higher development capacities, promote the growth of the regional state and improve the living standards of their residents;
By creating a conducive environment for the speedy and effective service rendering, and thereby increasing the participation and being beneficiary of the people, to enable them work to realize a viable peace and order and ensure rule of law in the cities as well as to ensure a fast development from which the people can benefit step by step through strengthening a solid integration within the different cities and between the cities and rural areas; 
Now, Therefore, in accordance with article 49(3) (a)of the Revised Oromia Regional State Constitution, it is here by proclaimed as follows.
Part One
General Provisions
Short title
This proclamation may be cited as “A proclamation to revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation No. 195/2015.”
Definitions
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:-
“Region” means the Oromia regional state
“City” means a city which has got legal personality as being a city
“City Administration” means a city which has got legal personality, and has its own council, administration council and the Judiciary established at Regio polis city ,principal city, higher city, intermediate city and growing city levels.
“Caffee” means Oromia regional state government “Caffee”.
. “Regi onalAdmi n i s t r at i on council” means the highest executive body of the Regional State Government Administration.
“Council” A body established as a representative at the city administration and kebele level by the election of the people.
“Court” means an ordinary court established at the city administration level that has jurisdiction over the matters to be tried at the ordinary courts and on the cases arising in the city.
“Administration council” means an executive body to be established at the city Administration, at the city district and at the city kebele levels.
“Constitution” means Oromia Regional State Constitution
“Mayor” means a chief executive officer of a city administration.
“City Manager” means an official who executes the municipal services of the city administration.
“Municipality Services” shall include Services such as water and sewage services, construction and maintenances of roads, fire dangers and accidents prevention, city land development, sanitation and beautification of a city , regular services provided to the residents and other activities to be decided and performed by the city.
“Bureau” means the Industry and Urban Development Bureau of Oromia.
“Regio polis city” means those cities that help to develop their surrounding cities by being centers of developments in various dimensions.
“City district” means the body in the organizational structure of a city next to the city administration which has an administration council and established as having the power of executive body of its level and is given the level of district.
“ kebele” means the initial city administration structure replacing the former kebele administration of a city which has a council, executive organ and social court of its own in the cities of the regional state in accordance with this proclamation.
“The city enactment” means a mandatory law issued by a city which is enforced in the city concerned.
“Government activity” means Activities performed by the government sectors in the city administration.
“Regulation protecting body” means without prejudice to the law protecting power vested in other bodies, it is a body established for protecting and enforcing the laws in the jurisdictions of the cities.
“City Associations” means asso ciations established by the cities which have legal personality for their mutual development benefits.
Gender description
In this proclamation, any expression in the masculine gender shall also applies to the feminine.
Scope of application
This proclamation shall be applicable on any city of the regional state having legal personality.
Part two
The Establishment, level, Power and Functions of the cities.
The level and Accountability of the cities.
The cities of the regional state shall be grouped in to the following grades depending on the development they achieved and the criteria to be set.
The Regio polis city Administration
The principal city Administration
The Higher city Administration
TheIntermediate city Administration
The Growing city Administration
The Municipality city Admin istration
The Growing municipal city Administration
The Grade of the cities of the regional state shall be evaluated depending on the criteria Provided as follows:-
The income which the city collects
Number of population
The surface area of the city
Its being center of Administration seat.
The implementation of sub article 2(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The accountability of the Regio polis city, principal city, and higher city shall be to the city’s council and to the Regional State president office.
The accountability of intermediate city and growing city shall be to the city’s council and the Zonal Administration office.
The accountability of municipal city and growing municipal city shall be to the district council and district administration office.
The means of providing supports to the cities of the regional state with thegrades specified under sub articles (a-g) of this article shall be decided by the Regional Administrative Council through identifying their grades and the support to be made.
Regarding the rural kebeles having the characteristics of cities but fail to fulfill the criteria of a city, the cities serving as the seats of districts and not included in the grades of the cities of the regional state provided in this proclamation, the bureau may consider them as a growing municipality and give them legal personality and decide their powers and functions.
Notwithstanding to the provisions of sub articles 2(a-d) of this article, the Regional Administration Council may extraordinarily decide the grade of a city and issue additional evaluation criteria of the grades of the cities. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The ways as to how any city may may be promoted to the next grade or downgraded from its grade, the tenure of the grade and other matters shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city administrations which are on the grades of Regio polis and the principal city administrations may establish the city district structural organization where they fulfill the criteria provided for city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Promotion of grade of any city shall be given only where its proposal is submitted by the Bureau and decided by the Regional Administration Council. Its details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Acquiring legal personality
Residents of a particular area may submit their request of acquiring city’s legal personality to the bureau through their representatives.
The request to be submitted as per sub article (1) of this article shall be in writing and shall fulfill the following criteria.
 Evidence revealing the boarders of the living place of the applicants given from the concerned government body.
 The surface area of the place and population number
 A description about the socioeconomic activities and the services found at that place.
 Evidence describing that 25% from the people residing in that area qualified for voting have supported the application.
 The plan prepared for the city which is approved by the concerned body.
 Other criteria provided by the directive to be issued by the bureau.
The bureau shall review and decide on the application submitted for acquiring legal personality of being a city within three (3) months and provide evidence describing the legal personality of the grade of the city.
Where the request for acquiring legal personality is not accepted, a written response shall be given to the applying body or their representatives by clearly specifying the reason for its non acceptance.
The bureau shall provide an evidence of legal personality for the city where it decides to provide such legal personality to a city.
Their grades shall be described thereof when the evidence of legal personality of the cities is provided
The effect of acquiring legal personality. Any city that has acquired legal  personality in accordance with this proclamation shall have the right to be called in its name, implement the powers and functions specified in this proclamation, the right to enter in to contracts, the right to own properties and may sue or be sued.
Cancellation of legal personality.
The legal personality of a city may only be cancelled or revoked where the city concerned is unable to observe and exercise the criteria of a city by defending the legal personality granted to it.
The bureau shall provide the necessary support to a city before canceling or revoking the legal personality of a city.
Where the legal personality of of a city is cancelled or revoked, the rights and duties of the city shall be transferred to the body for which the city has been previously accountable. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Merging of the cities.
The adjacent cities may be merge d where it is believed appropriate for service delivery and administrative activities depending on the interest and agreement of the residents when it is approved by the city council and based on the research conducted by of the bureau.
In accordance with this article sub article 1, the merging of the cities shall be submitted to the Regional Administration Council by the bureau and shall be approved. Anybody shall implement such decision.
Change of name of a city Administration.
Any city shall called by the name name acquired legal personality the change of name of a city shall be made depending on the interest and agreement of the  residents of the city submitted to the concerned city administration council and decided when deemed necessary.
The request decided by the city council as per sub article 1 of this article shall be approved by the Regional Administration Council.
The powers and functions of the cities
Any city shall have the powers and functions to:-
Decide on the social, econom ic and political activities in a way that participates the population of the city and make them the beneficiaries from the development achieved.
)Work to ensure good governance, and lay a transparent and accountable system.
Prepare the social, economic and budget plan of the city and implement same.
Administer the budget of the city according to the law. Determine the tax and service incomes as per the law; collects or make to be collected, and spend them on the growth and development activities or purposes of the city
Borrow money based on the decisions of the regional state or the city’s council.
Legally administer the houses under the city administration.
Administer the human resource of the city in accordance with the regional states’ civil servant law.
Create legal relationships and contractual agreements with government bodies, private investors, community associations, and with other fellow cities.
 Without prejudice to the provision under article 40 sub article8 of the constitution, it make one’s private property for public use by paying equivalent compensation in advance where the public interest requires so.
Create mutually beneficiary brotherly agreements with other cities in the country or outside the country depending on the provisions of this proclamation or other laws.
 Ensure that the construction activities underway in the city to be in such a way that protects the cleanliness, beauty and plan of the city.
 Administer and make productive the land under its master plan or which is found within its territory
 Depending on the regulation and directives to be issued, register and provide legal personalities for persons who want to organize in association for building homes; it also conducts researches regarding residential homes constructed with savings; and implement where it is authorized.
 Register contractual agreements of purchases and sales, house rents, houses attached in securities.
 Provide a speedy, effective and just service for the residents; particularly it constructs and maintains or causes the construction and maintenances of basic infrastructural services such as roads, potable water, electricity, telephone and mass transportations.
 Perform environmental protectiion activities such as wastes disposal, protection of environmental destruction, installation of pipe lines and other similar activities.
Provide social services like education, health services by emphasizing on preventive ways, HIV/AIDS prevention, Ambulance services, various evidences registration services, slaughter houses, Grave yards, markets and other similar services.
 Provide sporting services, theaters, refreshments, entertainments, Library, museum and other similar services.
 Provide protection of peace and order of the society, justice services, protection of fire dangers, supervising medicines and foods.
 Facilitate ways of providing nurturing services of elders, people suffering from physical incapacities and orphans.
 Perform activities which help to improve the developments of the city and the lives of the society through implementing activities generating incomes and poverty reduction programs.
 Prepare or cause the preparation of the plan of the city, amend, approve and implement it.
 Lay a modern working system so as to enable the various services be delivered in high quality and speed and to ensure that the residents seats be arranged in a way that make them to be easily accessed.
 Organize tourist attraction areas in the cities, follow up and prove the proper managements of archeological fossils and cultural materials
 Work to improve the participation of the residents on the development activities by organizing them level by level, it also works to develop the participation of the society and make them beneficiaries particularly of the women and youth.
Considering the conduciveness of the services delivered by the cities to their residents, it may be made to be provided wholly or partially with other government bodies or with private investor, or with the participation of the society or by other alternatives.
Part Three
Organization and management(managerial) Procedures of a city
Level of Administration power
Depending on the grade of a city, the level of power of the city administrations shall be provided as follows:-
 City Administration: –The city administration having full power.
 City district:-the organizational structure established following the city administration which has only the power of an executive body.
 kebele: - the initial administrati on level which is established following a city district.
The structure of city district shall be established following the city administration only in the cities having the grades of Regio polis and principal cities.
In the cities other than the Regio polis and principal city grades, the administration structure to be organized following the city administration is the kebele administration.
Organization of government bodies at the city level.The organization of government bodies of the cities shall be as follows-
The council:-the Law making body
Administration council:- the Law enforcing body
The Judiciary: - the law interpreting body.
Organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city.
The organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city shall be made in accordance with the level of the city and based on the levels provided in accordance with this proclamation, and shall be established by a city district and the kebele
The management body of a city district level shall be organized by only executive body and it shall be an executive body next to the city administration which implements the power delegated to it from the city administration.
At the city district level, the struct ure of a court may be organized as deemed necessary by the decision of the government.
Organization of the city zone level government bodies.
Organization of the city kebele level government bodies shall be as follows:-
The council:- the city kebele level law making body
The administration council:- the city kebele level high executive body
The social court:- the city kebele level law interpreting body.
System of management of a city.
The system of management of a city shall be “the mayor’s council” systemwhich shall be implemented only in the cities having their own councils. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city council
The regular election of the city council shall be made every five years
Members of the city council being odd number and shall be elected at the city and kebele levels by the residents of the city in accordance with their votes casted freely and secretly.
The number of members of the city council shall be implemented according to the law issued to determin the number of members of the district, city and kebele councils.
Where it is found that the number ber of Oromo nations residing in the city administrations having their own councils is less, the Oromia regional state “Caffee” may make that 51% of the seats in the city council to be reserved for them through comparing the number of the Oromo people with the number of other people in the city. This provision shall also apply on the kebele level city councils.
In the city administrations having their own councils 20% of the seats in the city councils shall be reserved for the rural kebeles bordering the city. The representatives of these adjacent rural Kebeles bordering the city shall be represented by the Kebele council or kebele councils from the elects.
Any person shall fulfill the criteria specified by the national election law to compete for the election of city councils and shall also know the working language of the regional state AfaanOromoo.
The municipal city and growing municipal cities without the need to establish their own independent council, shall have participation inthe district council as kebele or kebeles.
The powers and functions of the city council.
The city council shall have the powers and functions to:-
Implement or cause the implentati on of the powers and functions of the city councils provided under article 11 of this proclamation
Without prejudice to the provision of this article sub article 1, the city administration shall have the powers and functions to:-
 Issue city enactments or city ordinance on city matters being consistent with the policy, strategy and Laws of the regional state.
 Review and approve the socioeconomic and budget plan of the city submitted to it by the mayor; follow up its implementation.
 Decide the tax and service paym ents in accordance with the Law; Ensure its being collected.
 Follow up and supervise the land in the city whether it is administered in accordance with the law.
Approve the organizational structure of the city administration;decide the structure and work procedures of the executive bodies of the city; follows up its implementation.
 Establish permanent and temporary committees.
 Elect the speaker of the council among the members, decide on his activities.
 Elect the mayor of the city from the members of the council; approvehis appointment.
 Elect the deputy mayor of the city from the members or nonmembers of the council.
 Establish the city administration council depending on the grade of the city; decide the number of members of the council depending on the recommendation of the mayor; approve the appointment of members of the council submitted by the mayor and decide about their work.
 Approve the city’s plan; follows up its implementation.
 Prepare work performance standards and the goals of the plan year and review the activities accordingly and pass decisions.
 Issue code of conducts for its members and follows up its implementation.
 Deliver work performance reports to the residents periodically
Term of office and Accountability of the city council
The term of office of the city counccil shall be five years
The city council shall be accountable to the people and the Regional State“ Caffee”
The meeting procedure of the city council.
The city council shall have its regular meeting once in three months;extraordinary meeting may becalled where the speaker or the mayor or 1/3 of members of the council requested so.
The presence of more than half of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the council.
The decision of the council shall be passed by the majority vote ofthe members participated on the meeting.
The meeting of the council shall be open to the public unless it is deemed necessary for the security of the city or moral of the public or to protect the rights of other members,
The council shall have a registry to register its activities and decisions.
The appointments of the speaker.
The speaker of the council shall be elected from the members of the council and is accountable to the council.
The term of office of the speaker shall be the term of office of the council.
Without prejudice to the provisions of sub article (2) of this article, the speaker may be removed from position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons.
 Voluntary resignation of his position
 Removed from his position by the council.
 Interruption of his being membership of the council
 Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively.
The provision under sub article3 (a-d) shall only be implemented where it is the city delivered to council and approved.
Particulars for the implementation of this article sub article 3(a-d)shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
Powers and Function of the speaker of the city council.
The speaker of the council shall have the following power and functions:-
Calls the council’s meeting; prepare agendas of the discussion, chairs the council’s meeting, organize the committees of the council.
Manages the administrative matters of the council, cause the enforcement of disciplinary measures taken on the members by the council and represents the city.
Extends the ways by which thecouncil shall be organized by the permanent and temporary committee’s plans and follows up its implementation.
Prepares training plans designed for promoting or enhancing the members’ performance abilities; cause its implementation with the concerned executive bodies.
Ensure the transfer of decisions of the council to the concerned bodies; follows up its implementation,
Represents the council in all its relations with the third party.
Performs other activities assigned to it from the council.
The Appointments and Accountability of the mayor and deputy mayor
The mayor of a city shall be assigned from the members of the council and nominated by the council.
The deputy mayor of a city council shall be elected from the members or from the non-members of the council, and appointed by the city’s council.
The mayor of Rejio polis, principal city and higher city shall be accountable to the city’s council and to the president of the region.
Mayor of intermediate and growing cities shall be accountable to the city’s council and Chief Administrator of the zone.
Manager of municipal city and the growing municipal city shall be accountable to the district Administrator’s office.
The deputy mayor shall be accountable the mayor of a city.
The term of office of the mayor shall be the term of office of the council.
Subject to the provision of sub article 7 of this article, the mayor of a city may be removed from his position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons:-
 Voluntary resignation of his job
 Suspension from his responsibility by the council
 Interruption of his being membership of the council or
 His Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively.
The particulars of the enforcement of sub article 8(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
The powers and Functions of the mayor
The mayor shall have the powers and Functions to:-
Serve as the head and chief executive of a city.
Ensure the respect of the constitution and constitutional system as well as the law in the city.
Implement the policy, strategy and and the laws of the regional state and those enacted at national level and the decisions passed by the city council and the regional state administration council’ and cause their implementation, submit performance reports to the council and an organ to whom it is accountable.
Select members of the administration council and submit his proposal to the city council for approval of their appointment; manage their activities in accordance with the law.
Select the manager of a city depen ding on the abilities and leadership quality and submit to the city council for approval of his appointment.
Ensure the rendering of speedy, effective and just services by the manager of the city.
Represent the city on holiday events celebrated at a regional, national and public level.
Prepare the plan and budget of the city by discussing with the administration council and submit to the city council; implement or cause their implementation up on approval.
Organize forums in collaboration on with the concerned bodies so as to enable the people forward their opinions on the plan, budget, work performances and other issues of the city.
Perform other activities assigned to him from the city council, Office of the president and from the administration offices of different levels depending on the grades of the cities.
The power and duties of deputy mayor
The deputy mayor shall have the powers and functions to:-
Represent and perform activities of the mayor where he is not at office.
Perform other activities assigned to him by the city council and the mayor.
The city Administration council
The city Administration council may be established from the members or from the non –members of the city council.
The number of members of thecities’ administration council shall be decided by the city council depending on the recommendation of the mayor. The particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Members of the city Administration council shall be individually and jointly liable for the decision they pass.
Term of office of the Administration council shall be the term of office of the council.
The city Administration council shall be accountable to the mayor and the city council.
The Power and Functions of City Administration Council
The city administration council shall have the power and functions to;
Follow up and ensure the implementation of laws, decisions and grades made by the regional state and the decisions and grades made by the city council; cause the protection of the constitution, constitutional system and laws.
Manage and organize the government activities performed in the city.
Prepare the budget of the city; implement up on its approval.
Prepare the social and economic development strategies as well as operational programs of the city; implement same up on approval.
Perform other activities assigned to it by the council and the mayor of the city.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager and Deputy Manager
The manager of Rigio polis, principal, higher, medium level and growing city shall be appointed by the city council upon the nomination by the mayor of the city, being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The manager of the municipal city city and growing municipal city shall be appointed by district council upon the nomination by the chief administrator of the district being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The deputy manager shall be accountable to the manager of the city.
The manager of a city shall be a member of the city administration council.
The Rigio polis and principal cities may have more than one deputy manager
The deputy manager of city shall be assigned by mayor of the city and nominated by the city council.
The accountability of the deputyty manager shall be to the general manager of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager
The manager of a city shall have the power and functions:-
Serve as an executive of the city municipal services.
Manage and organize the city municipal services.
Develop and submit to the mayor,service delivery indicators and levels,ensure their implementations upon approval.
Ensure the implementation of policies, laws and levels approved by the regional state and the decisions of city council in the service delivery branches of the city.
Constitute and direct a management committee consisting of heads of service delivering bodies of the city.
Assign heads of service delivering bodies of the city
Recruit, administer and dismiss employees serving in the service delivering bodies of the municipal city according to the law.
Make recommendations, to the Mayor, for the establishment of municipal city service delivering bodies and alternative means of delivering different services; implement same when decided.
Organize and submit to the Mayor, standards and directives of service delivery; implement same upon approved.
Prepare and submit to the Mayor, the budget and work plan of the budget year of municipality service delivering bodies; implement same upon approval.
Receive and entertain the complaints of residents concerning the municipality services transparently; give speedy responses for the complaints.
Submit to the Mayor, periodic work performance and financial reports about services of municipality.
Power and Functions of Deputy Manager
Deputy Manager shall have the following power and functions:-
Serve as deputy manager and de partment organizer.
Act on behave of city manager, where he is absent or unable to perform his activities.
Perform his branch’s functions and other activities, which are specifically identified and assigned to him by the city manager.
Establishment and Accountability of sectorial offices of the cities
The sectorial offices and different services delivering institutions shall be established in accordance with the grade of the city and they may be accountable to the mayor or their superior. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the regional state administration council.
Establishment of City District
The city district shall be the structture following city administration that may be organized with the number of population from 10,000 to 20,000. Its particulars shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
The city district may estabilish by4 (four) or more than kebeles.
The city district shall be accountable to the people and to the city administration.
The city district shall have its own government structure in order to provide speedy and effective services.
A permanently operating executive body shall be established in the city district and its functions shall be the functions of the city administration council provided under article 26 of this proclamation. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Rigio polis and principal city shall be proposed by the executive committee of city district and appointed by the mayor of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Regio polis and principal city, being accountable to the manager of the city and executive organ of the district and shall have the following power and functions:
Participate, without a vote, in the meetings of the city council.
Implement and cause the implementation of the service delivery activities of the city.
Being together with the manager of the city, make recommendation about alternative implementation of different activities for the services delivery in the city district and city kebeles; implement same when allowed.
Administer employees of the municipality of the city district in accordance with the law.
Submit work performance reports to the manager of the city.
prepare work plan of the city district depending on the plan of the city; implement same upon approval.
Pass decision on issues relating to city services in the city district.
Perform other additional functions assigned to him by the manager of the city.
Establishment of City Kebele
The City Kebele shall be established by this proclamation as the lower administrative structure in the cities having or not having council.
The City Kebele shall be organized by the government power structures of the council, the administration council and the social court.
A City Kebele may be established having the number of population from 2,000 to 10,000. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The City Kebele shall have rules and regulations enforcement body.
Power and Function of Kebele
Without prejudice to the powers and functions give to kebele by Regional constitution , the city Kebele shall have the powers and function of its levels by sharing it from the city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment of Kebele Manager
The manager of a city Kebele, being evaluated by his professional ability and leadership efficiency, shall be nominated by the chairperson of the kebele, and appointed by the Kebele council.
Part Four
Establishment of Regular and Social Courts of a City
Establishments of Regular Courts
Cities of different hierarchy shall have the court having judicial power, which shall be established in cities having their own councils as deemed necessary.
The city court to be established as per this proclamation shall be realized with the request of Oromia Supreme Court depending on the research.
The structure of these courts shall be in accordance with the structure and practices of the regional state courts.
As per this article, city matters entertained by the courts at the city administration level shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Establishment of Social Courts
A social court, which shall have jurisdiction over petty offences committed in the city, shall be established at City Kebele level.
The city kebele social court shall be accountable to the city Kebele council.
The powers and functions of the kebele social courts provided by proclamation shall be applicable on the city kebele social courts.
Establishment of Regulation enforcement body
Every city district and city Kebele shall establish rules and regulation enforcement body; whose number may vary according to the differences of the district or the kebele. Its particulars shall be decided by the internal regulation to be issued by the city council.
Part Five
Relationships of the Cities with the Residents and Other Bodies
Relations with the Residents
The relationship of the cities with the residents shall depend on the fundamental constitutional principle that says, “All power emanates from the people”.
It is only the people of the city who can elect or remove from their power members of the city councils. The people in the city alone may recall the representatives they have elected for the city administration council.
Ensuring the Peoples’ Participation
Residents, civic associations, and private sectors shall made to discuss and express their views on the work programs, budget proposals,project ideas, work performances, finance and audit reports of the fiscal year.
Whether the city have council or not, the city administration shall facilitate forums at least once in every three months to enable the residents of the city whether , civic associations, and private sectors to discuss and present their views on various issues concerning the city.
Without prejudices to this article sub article 2, A public meeting may be called by the city where the circumstance so requires.
The city administration shall device different strategies and facilitates conditions to encourage residents of the city to participate in the different boards or committees established for the purpose city matters.
Any city has a duty to give a prompt response to questions and complaints raised by the residents.
Relationship Between the City and City Kebele
The power, function and internal organization of city kebele shall be based principle of decentralization, which its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city kebele council may make proposal to the city administration or district administration on matters relating to the development activities of the kebele.
Federal or Regional government function matters that used to be performed by the city kebele and excluded from the powers and functions of a city as per this proclamation may be performed in accordance with the agreement made between the regional government and the city administration.
Part Six
Relationships between the Cities and Regional Government
General Principles
Based on the recognition that cities are autonomous; accountable and responsible to the regional government; the relationship between the cities and regional government shall be guided by the spirit of cooperation, partnership, collaboration and rule of law.
The relationship between the regional government and the cities shall facilitate favorable condition for coordinated planning and flow of information.
Regional government and Cities Partnership
To perform its powers and functions the city may work together in coordination or by agreement with the administrative bodies or institutions of the regional government to play its role.
The regional Government may organize regional organs when deemed necessary or perform regional government powers and functions in the city.
Enactment and Enforcement of Laws and Standards
The regional government may provide necessary technical support to enable cities to perform their powers and functions by issuing necessary laws and standards.
The cities shall be responsible to ensure the enforcement of laws and observance standards.
The decisions rendered and working system established by the cities shall be consistent with the policies, strategies, programs and laws issued at regional state and at country level.
How the Regional Government Assists the Cities
Without prejudice to the grant regional government may give for the implementation of specific projects, the regional government shall provides development assistance to the cities basis of competitiveness and equity.
The regional government shall create favorable conditions within which cities can develop and grow.
Establishing Joint Committee
In order to strengthen urban-rural economic interaction, the cities may establish joint committee with the adjoining district to work cooperatively on issues of mutualinterest.
Boundary dispute arising between the cities and the ad-joining rural kebele shall be settled amicably between the city and concerned rural kebele. Failing such amicable settlement, the decision of regional administration council shall be final.
How Cities Submit their Re-ports
The cities shall submit quarterly and annual work performance and financial reports to the body for which they are accountable; submitaudit reports to the body for which they are accountable as found necessary.
The body to which the report is submitted may periodically review the reports and give feedbacks to ensure the accuracy of the reports.
Dissolution of City Council
"Caffee" may cause city council to be dissolved “” when it believes that operation of the city council poses a threat to the federal and regional state's constitution, or where serious security problems or human right violations which cannot be controlled as well as where it believes that serious injury to the public interest has been occurred.
Where the city administration council dissolves in accordance of sub article 1 of this article, the temporary administration shall be nominated by the regional council;caffee of the region shall make arrangement with the concerned body to make fresh elections within the time fixed. The details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Part Seven
City Finance and Budget Administration
Fiscal year
The fiscal year of cities shall be the fiscal year of the regional government.
Revenue Sources of Cities
Income of cities shall be from the following sources:
 Revenue and taxes authorized by law and service delivery fees collected from services they render.
 Budget support granted by the regional government.
 Loans and Assistances
 Other income sources
Every regular income or revenue collected at the city level shall be income of the cities. The condition by which cities support each other shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Without prejudice to Sub-article(2) of this Article, it shall be effective from the next budget year.
The cities shall receive payment for the function they perform to the regional government.
Prior to the implementation of the loan of the cities in accordance with sub-article (1)c of this article, its importance shall be decided by regional state administration council.
The cities may borrow money from the federal or regional governments as well as from the legally recognized financial institutions. The loan obtained in such a way shall be allocated only for the expenses the of capital projects.
Details of the condition of loan and their payments shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Administration System and Books of Accounts
Every city shall have power and responsibility to systemically organize and administer its property.
The financial system of every city shall be implemented in accordance with the regional state financial system.
Every city shall have complete and accurate books of account and financial documents.
The Bureau shall make necessary supports for the cities to improve their efficiencies of budget preparation and performances. details of the condition shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Reporting Systems
The mayor shall present the financial reports of the city administration to the city council twice a year; also discloses it to the public.
The manager of a city district, municipality, and growing municipality shall present the financial reports of the city periodically to the body to whom it is accountable; also discloses it to the public.
Auditing System
Every city shall have internal Audit.
The internal auditor, who shall be accountable to accountable to the head of the institution, shall ensure on day-by-day basis that the resources of the city are being implemented in accordance with the relevant financial regulations.
Part Eight
Human Resource Management of cities
General Principles
Recruitment and administration of human resource of the cities shall be in accordance with administration of civil servant law of the regional state.
Every city shall have power to recruit,administer, specify the power and duties, decide the salary and benefits and dismiss its employees in accordance with the regional state civil servant law.
Except for political appointees, the placement of city officers and employees shall be carried out depending on their efficiency and importance to the position based on sufficient examination.
Applicability of the regional state civil servants law
The Regional state government civil servant law shall also be applicable on the employees of the municipality service.
Part Nine
City Plan
Power to Prepare and Implement City Plan
Every city shall have the power to prepare, cause to be prepared, approve, amend and implement a city plan.
The cities shall observe the fundamental principles, guidelines and standards of plan preparation of the regional state and the federal government in the process of plan preparation. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Notwithstanding to the provision under sub article (1) of this article, the power to approve the planof the municipal and growing municipality cities shall be the district council.
The bureau, with the concerned body, may review the city plan to ascertain its conformity with the condition provided under sub-article 2 of this article; add necessary improvements on the plan if necessary; submit it to the city or district councils.
Enabling City Residents Participate
The residents of the city shall have rights to participate and forward their views in all phases of plan preparation and implementation.
The city shall device the system and favorable condition by which residents of the city can efficiently express their opinions and forward their views in the preparation and implementation of the city plan.
Part Ten
Association of Cities
Establishment
Cities in the region may establish associations of their own and actively participate in the operation thereof.
The association shall be registered by the appropriate government body and acquire legal personality.
The structural and manner of operation of the association shall be determined by its memorandum of association and internal regulation.
Power and Functions of Associations of the Cities
The association of cities, without prejudice to the power and functions provided under its memorandum of association and internal regulation; shall have the following power and functions;
Works to realize the existence of inter-city cooperation; sharing of experiences and ideas.
Represent cities and exchange their views on matters of common interest.
Work to strength the performance abilities of the cities by providing trainings and material support for its members.
Create strong relationships with local and foreign city associations in consultation with the Bureau; and
Carry out other activities that would enhance the developments of cities in the region.
Part Eleven
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power and Functions of the Bureau
Notwithstanding powers and duties entrusted to it by other laws, the bureau shall have the powers and responsibilities to follow up and ensure the implementation of all matters provided in this proclamation, and policies, strategies, and laws relating to the cities of the regional state,
Advice the regional state government on matters relating to cities; undertake or cause to be undertaken different researches concerning cities; submit it toconcerned bodies; implement same when authorized,
Submit work performance reports of the cities to the regional state government,
Prepare directives and working practices to enable the urban land to be used economically and for highly beneficial purposes in accordance with the plan of the city; cause to be implemented; supervise and control,
Conduct researches periodically concerning the technical and material supports necessary for the cities, as well as issues that strengthen their performance abilities; and submit to the concerned bodies; implement or cause it to be implemented when authorized,
Entertain and decide on the request of residents to obtain legal personality of being a city,
Reviews the request of the cities for promotion to the next grade and submit its proposal to the regional administration council; implements same upon approval,
Support cities of the regional state to create and strengthen relationship with other cities in the country and outside the country,
Work for the existence of favorable working relationships between the regional government and cities of the regional state government,
Transitory Provisions
The regional state government administration council may decide on how this proclamation can be implemented at different levels in various cities.
As per the provision of sub article(1) of this article, the current city administration may be made to continue functioning until the election of members of the city council by the next national election period stepwise.
The administration structure that had been functioning before the approval of this proclamation shall continue until the grades of the cities in the region are decided in accordance with this proclamation.
Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of article 23 of this proclamation, the designation and appointment of Mayor of Cities administration will continue until the election of council of city administration held.
Transfer of Rights and Obligations
The rights and obligations of the cities before the approval of this proclamation shall proceed in accordance with this proclamation.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directives
The regional state government administrative council may issue a regulation for the implementation of this proclamation.
The Bureau may issue directives for the implementation of this proclamation and the regulation to be issued.
Inapplicable Laws
Any proclamation, regulation, directive and customary practices contrary to this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered by this proclamation.
Urban Local Government Proclamation of Oromia National Regional State No. 65/2003 and its amendment proclamation No. 116/2006 are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
A Proclamation to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No. 163/ 2011 Article 61 Sub-articles (1-5 ) and proclamation No. 170/2012 article 2 sub article 3 (1-3) are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
Duty to Cooperate
Any organ shall have a duty to cooperate for the implementation of this proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall come into force as of its publication on MegeletaOromia 
Finfinne
This 2nd of October 2015
Muktar kedir
President of Oromia National
Regional state
Proclamation No. 179/2013
A Proclamation to Establish Oromia National Regional State Urban Land Development and Management Agency
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to implement programs stated in the urban land development and management policy in an organized manner;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to make free this limited resources from misuse and rent-seeking through the realization of urban land development and management system within the urban areas of the region in a way that has transparency and accountability and to realize social and economic transformation;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to strengthen implementation capacity of urban by creating information and data system of urban land by creating modern procedure and technology as well as building skilled and competent manpower;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to establish an organ that work on urban land development and management issues which has been executed at different place in a scattered manner;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3) (a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
PART ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “A Proclamation to Establish Urban Land Development and Management Agency No. 179/2013.”
Definitions
Unless the context required otherwise in this Proclamation:-
“Bureau” means Oromia Industry and Urban Development Bureau.
“Urban” means urban whose population is 2000 and more and where the livelihood of 50% of this popultion does not depend up on agriculture.
“Urban Land” means land found in the boundary of urban administration.
“Urban Land Management” means administering and leading urban land and land related property in a modern way.
“Urban Administration” means urban administration that acquired legal and concerned government organ recognition.
“Land Related Property” means urban land and immovable property found on it.
“Cadastre” means a system by which land and real propertiy found on it is registred and known.
“Urban Plan” means structural plan, local development plan or basic plan of an urban center including annexed descriptive documents which are legally endorsed by the authorized body and have legally binding effect.
“Person” means physical or judicial person or organization.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall apply to the feminine gender.
Objectives of the Agency
To enhance transparency and accountability in urban land use that is guided by urban plan to bring basic change in socio-economic of urban society as well as, fast growth and development of towns by creating organized urban land development and management system.
PART TWO
Establishement, Organization and Power and Duties of the Agency
Establishment and Accountability
Oromia National Regional State Land Development and Mamanagement Agency hereafter called “Agency” shall be established by this Proclamation.
The Agency shall be accountable to the Bureau.
The Head Office of the Agency
The head office of the Agency shall be in Finfine Town and it may have structure and office at Zonal, Urban, and Kebele level as it may necessary.
Organization of the Agency
The Agency shall have the following organization.
General Manager,
Deputy General Manager and
Other necessary workers.
Powers and Duties of the Agency
The Agency shall have the following powers and duties:-
Implement urban land development and management policy and strategy,cause to be implemented, follow up,and control.
Provide modern urban land development and administration system; cause to be provided; support; control and follow up.
Implement, follow up and control lease laws and other laws related to urban land development and management.
Provide and cause to be provided urban land administration and service delivery system which ensures transparency, efficiency, quality and accountably.
Collect, organize, administer and disseminate information and data regarding land and property related with urban land.
Cause modern data and information system related with urban land and property related to it to be provided; follow up and control its implimentation.
Study and prepare urban land, with the necessary infrastructure, free from dispute and complaint for investment and development service, transfer to the concerned body, control its implementation, take and cause the necessary legal measure to be taken;
Study and identify old urban areas, facilitate conditions with the concerned body for its redevelopment, follow up its implementation.
Follow up, control the implimentation of urban land previously given for investment is utalized in accordance with the existing law, where necessary cause legal measure to be taken with the concerned body.
Recieve, organize and submit request of investment land for manufacturing and industry to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council and cause to be decided and implemented; follow up its implementation, if not performed as per the the agreement take and cause the necessary measure to be taken.
Make investors sign an agreement with urban administration; register,hold the agreement and transfer it to the concerned body.
Execute request of change of ownership and type of investment land project with the concerned body; follow up its implementation.
Cause compensation to be estimated in accordance with the law for persons whose land is expropriated; cause compensation to be paid before their displacement.
Undertake research to make compensation payment correspond with the market value of the time; submit it to the concerned body and cause to be approved, implement and cause to be implemented with the concerned body.
Work in coordination with the concerned body to rehabilitate persons whose land is expropriated; support; follow up and control.
Provide a system in which urban identify, register rural land and utilize it for development and avoid illegal activities.
Provide a system which makes urban land delivery fruitful and urban economic development aim to be achieved.
Provide land preparation system and organize land data bank.
Shall give construction and land utilization license; follow up its implementation; where a problem is found take and cause legal measure to be taken with the concerned body.
Give and cause to be given a training that strengthen worker's implementation capacity.
Shall provide urban land utilization plan that ensures the realization of urban development goal, that could be implemented and as well as correspond with each other.
Issue Directives and guideline to ensure urban land use for maximum economical benefit in accordance with urban plan, cause its implement ation; follow up and control its implementation.
Issue Directive and guideline with the concerned body to control the expansion of illegal construction inside urban areas and on the borders; follow up, control its implimentation; take and cause legal measure to be taken.
Coordinate the collection and organization of data regarding land and property related to land in urban areas as per cadastral map system; control; cause its implementation.
Follow up, control cities whether they follow the master plan in a modern way; give the necessary support in the preparation of the town's master plan as per the standard.
Study and submit structure and salary of the employees of the agency to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council and implement the same upon approval.
Study and submit urbans that did not enter in to the lease system to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval and impliment the same upon approval; follow up its implementation.
Study and Submit initial lease price of urban land to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval; cause to be implemented; support.
Coordinate, control those organs accountabile to it.
Own property, enter in to contract; sue and to be sued.
Appointment
The General Manager and the Deputy General Manager of the Agency shall be nominated by the President of the National Regional State of Oromia and appointed by National Regional State's Administrative Council.
Powers and duties of the General Manager
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties.
Coordinate and administer duties of the Agency.
Implement the powers and duties of the Agency; cause to be implement.
May delegate some of his powers and duties to heads and other worker under him for better implementation.
Employ, administer and fire workers in accvordance with civil servant law.
Represent the Agency in all communications with the third party.
Prepare and submit work plan and budget to the concerned body and implement the same upon approval.
Administer, open bank account and run the budget of the Agency, as per financial law.
Prepare and submit work performance and budget execution report to the concerned body.
Powers and duties of the Deputy Manager
Represent the General Manager in his absence.
Perform duties given to him by the General Manager.
PART THREE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Income of the Agency
Income of the Agency shall be from the budget allocated by the government and various donations.
Book of Account
The Agency shall have full and clear book of account and financial documents.
Account Audit
Books of account and financial document of the Agency shall be audited by Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Office or by other auditor assigned by it.
Transitional Provisions
All works and datas related with urban land started by various bodies shall be transferred to the Agency by this Proclamation.
Accountability of Different Bodies
The Oromia Urban Planning Institute and Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office shall be accountable to the Agency.
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may establish different bodies by Regulation to ensure the proper implementation of the powers and duties of the Agency.
Powers to Issue Regulation & Directives
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may issue Regulation to implement this Proclamation.
The Agency may issue Directives to implement this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
Article 13 Sub-Article (2)(f) of Proclamation No. 163/2011 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Articles 4 (6), (7),(9), (10) and (28) of Proclamation No. 170/2012 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office Regulation No. 142/2012 Article 4 Sub- Article 2, Article 7 Sub-Article 1, Article 8 Sub-Article 11 and Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 Sub-Articles 5 and 7 and Article 16 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistant with this Proclamation shall not be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come in to effect as of the 13th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of Oromia National Regional
State
Finfine, 13th of July 2013
Proclamation No. 180/2013
A Proclamation to Establish Irrigation Development Authority of Oromia National Regional State
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to expand irrigation development to secure food self sufficiency and increase production and productivity to supply raw materials for industries without being dependent on erratic and uneven rainfall distribution;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to bring together different irrigation development activities which were under taken and followed by different bodies, which weakened the development activity and bring together the scattered resource to one place and use it;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to establish an independent governmental organ to expand irrigation development in a sustainable manner without affecting the environment;
NOW THERFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3(a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This proclamation may be cited as “Irrigation Development Authority Establishment Proclamation No. 180/2013’’.
Definition
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Scheme Adminstration’’ means to manage, follow up, care, and adminster different irrigation scale which their construction is completed to make them able to give sustainable irrigation supply.
“Irrigation Scheme’’ means an irrigation field having tradtional and modern irrigation infrastructure anddevelopment found at a defined place.
“Users’’ any person, private assocation or organization or that uses irrigation developemnt scheme.
“Tradtional Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using tradtional method, skill and local material.
“Modern Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using irrigation infrastructures constructed in modern way having modern technology.
“Jallisii Bonne/Moisture Irrigation/’’ means developing irrigation farming using soil moisture.
“Micro Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of less than 2.5 hectares.
“Small Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of 2.5 - 200 hectares.
“Medium Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation which undertaken on an area of above 200 to 3000 hectares.
“Large Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of more than 3000 hectares.
“Irrigation Development’’ means to develop an irrigation farming using different technologies with ground or surface water or both.
“Irrigation Farming’’ means farming conducted using irrigation water.
“Drainage’’ means to drain excess water from farm land which is more than the need of the crop.
“Technology’’ means all the infrastructures and inputs required for the development of irrigation.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this Proclamation set out in a masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Establishment and Accountability
Oromia Irrigation Development Authority,here after referred as “The Authority’’ is hereby established by this Proclamation.
The Authority shall be accountable to the President of the National Regional State of Oromia.
Objective
Support by irrigation development, to hasten socio economic growth of the farmers and pastoralist community of the region,to alleviate shortage of food crops and for the people of the region to attain food selfsufficiency in sustainable manner.
Office of The Authority
The head office of the Authority shall be in Finfinne and may have offices at Zone,District and Keble level as necessary.
PART TWO
Organization, Powers and Duties of the Authority
Organization of The Authority
The Authority shall have:
General Manager,
Deputy General Manager and
Required staffs;
Powers and Duties of the Authority
The Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Prepares and submit policies, strategies and programs related to irrigation to the government and implement the same upon approval.
Undertake and cause the undertaking of the study, design, construction and scheme management of traditional, micro, small, medium and large scale irrigation.
Fully administer, follow up, execute technical work of those medium and large scale irrigations whose construction is completed up until the users are self sufficient to administer;conduct maintenance work and cause to conducted where it is found to be beyond the capacity of the users, and turn the administration over to them when they are self sufficient.
Undertake awareness creation advice and follow up on fee collection and saving to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of irrigation scheme.
Conserve the water resource in the region for sustainable irrigation developmentin collaboration with the concerned bodies.
Undertake drainage work where it is necessary in the region.
Undertake water harvesting for irrigation development.
Undertake a study with the concerned body on problems related with areas of irrigarion development, drainage, also on irrigation technology; coordinate; dessiminate research findings and improved technology; prepare demonstration plots.
Taking the responsibility of following up, supporting, strengthening micro and moisture irrigation to be undertaken by community.
Collaborate with stakeholders who contribute to the sustainability and growth of irrigation development.
Follow up, administer, irrigation development funds obtained from different funding agencies as grant or loan is utilized for the intended purpose and report its implimentation to concerned the bodies.
Shall handover completed small scale irrigation projects to the users, provide technical support, follow up, conduct maintenance, cause to be conducted where it is found beyond the capacity of the users.
Collect irrigation construction investment cost from the users; where it is allowed by the government invest it back on irrigation projects; collect different service and maintainance fees and utialize it back.
Select technologies that enables to speed up farming, work with the concerned bodies on the quality of the selected technologies.
Expand irrigation extension and irrigation development farming advisory service.
Identify, record and scale up best practice of irrigation development from all levels and disseminate.
Strengthen community participation on irrigation development.
Organize water user associations, train, assist and follow up in the the preparation of thier by laws also work with the concerned bodies for them to get legal personality.
Work and facilitate conditions for women and youth to be participants and users of irrigation development;
Gives necessary technical support and supervise those organs working on irrigation development.
Look for fund through different methods for irrigation and drainage coverage increment.
Work with the concerned bodies to minimize the negative impact that irrigation development may cause on the environment and human being.
Evaluate, the outcome and problems of irrigation development and drainage works undertaken at any level.
Works with the concerned bodies to supply different irrigation farming development inputs that assists in increasing production and productivity.
Facilitate conditions with the concerned body for irrigation development users to get credit service; and follow up.
Works with concerned bodies to control migratory and regular pests which can affect irrigation crop product.
Works with concerned body on conservation and watershade development related with irrigation development areas based on the regional watershade development guideline.
Impliment irrigation development related laws in the region.
Use water without permission for small scale irrigation development for the benefit of the community.
Facilitate conditions for farmers and pastoralists to produce market oriented products and work with the concerned body for them to get market for their products.
Work with the concerned body to cause payment of compensation to those affected by construction of irrigation development in accordance with the law.
Give capacity building training to upgrade the execution capacity of experts and users of irrigation development; provide the required material for the employees; facilitate conditions and follow up its outcome.
Own property, enter into contract, sue and be sued.
Power and Duties of the General Manager
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties;
The General Manager executes the power and duties given to the Authority;
Plan, organize, coordinate, direct, administer and control the activities of the Authority;
Employ, administer and fire employees in accordance with the civil service law of the region;
Represent the Authority in all its dealings with third parties;
Prepare and submit plan and annual budget to the government and implement the same upon approval;
Administer the budget, open and operate bank accounts of the Authority
Prepare and submit financial and performance report of the Authority to the regional government;
Where found necessary for the effective performance of his activities, may delegate part of his powers and duties to the officials that are accountable to him.
Power and Duties of the Deputy General Manager
Where in the absence of the General Manager acts on behalf of him;
Execute works given by the General Manager.
PART THREE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Source of Income
The source of income for the Authority is the allocated budget by the government, financial assistance and fees paid for different services.
Books of Account
The Authority shall keep complete book of account and financial documents.
Audit
The books of account and property of the Authority shall be audited by the Auditor General of Oromia or by an auditor represented by it.
Powers to Iissue Regulation
The Administrative Council of the National Regional State of Oromia may issue a Regulation to execute this Proclamation.
Provision of Transition
Rights and obligation related to irrigation development which was given to Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau is transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation;
Works related to irrigation development which were constructed and those that are under construction by Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Works related to irrigation scheme administration activities which were undertaken by Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise, assets, data and materials for this work are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Assets, data and materials which were used for irrigation development activities at Oromia Agricultural Bureau and Oromia Water Mine and Energy are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Repealed Laws
Article 17 Sub-Article 13, 20, 21, 22 and 23 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs Proclamation are repealed by this Proclamation;
Article 24 Sub-Article 2, 3 and 4 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs are repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Article 2(b) of Regulation No. 58/2005 issued to amend Regulation No. 14/1999, Regulation to Provide the Amendment of Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise Establishment is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistent with matters provided for under this Proclamation shall be inapplicable.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 13th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of the National Regional
State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 13th of July 2013
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public Enterprises Proclamation
WHEREAS, it is found necessary for the government to put an effort to bridge the market gap through capacity building by enhancing the role of the private sector in accelerating economic development for sustainability of the economic development;
WHEREAS, public enterprises have to continue under state ownership, it is necessary to provide them with such guidance so as to enable them to improve their effectiveness, to be competitive and profitable and thereby play appropriate role in the implementation of the economic development;
WHEREAS, it becomes necessary to establish clear and legal procedures that public enterprises follow in the free market economy, to participate in the stabilization of the market for public benefit and/or efficiently implementation of the mission given to them;
WHEREAS, to enable the Regulatory Authority, in leading and supporting public enterprises to fulfill their objectives efficiently,it is necessary to establish conducive environment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3 (a) of Proclamation No. 46/1994 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
CHAPTER ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Public Enterprise Proclamation No.181/2013”.
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Authority” means Oromia Government Public Enterprise Regulatory Authority.
“Board” means the management board of government public enterprise.
“Net Profit” means any excess of all revenue and receipts over costs, salary and operating expenses properly attributable to the operations of the financial year including depreciation, interest and taxes.
“Public Enterprise” means a wholly or partially state owned public enterprise established by the government to carry on manufacturing, distribution,construction service rendering or other economic development and related activities.
“Initial Capital” means total assets assigned to the enterprise by the government at the time of its establishment and later.
“Regional Administrative Council” means supreme excutive organ of the National Regional Government.
“Government” means the National Regional Government of Oromia.
“Auditor” means a natural or juridical person who is enpowered to audit the accounts of public enterprise.
“State Dividend” means the remaining balance after deduction of legal reserve and other reserve from the net profit.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this proclamation set out in masculine gender shall also apply to feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall be applicable on any existing public enterprise and on those established after the issuance of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER TWO
Establishment and Legal Personality of Public Enterprise
Requirements to be Met Before Establishment of an Enterprise
Before the establishment of an enterprise the Authority shall ascertain that:
) The payment which is made in kind is valued properly by an expert.
) Cash paid as part of the initial capital is deposited in a bank and in the account of the enterprise.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article if the payment made in kind has audited accounts the book value of each payment in kind may be taken into account.
The experts stated under Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article shall prepare a report containing a detailed description of the property, the value given to each item and the method of valuation.
Where any expenses incurred by the Authority for the establishment of an enterprise is confirmed by the auditors, it shall form part of the capital.
The sums deposited under Sub-Article 1(b) of this Article shall not be withdrawn from the bank until the establishment of the enterprise.
Establishment of the Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall be established by this Proclamation and the establishment law shall contain:
The name of the enterprise,
The objectives of the enterprise,
A statement that the enterprise shall be governed by this proclamation,
The authorized capital,
The amount of the initial capital paid up both in kind and in cash,
The address of the head office of the enterprise,
That it may have branches,
The duration for which the enterprise is established.
Working Procedure, Legal Personality and Liability of Public Enterprise
A public enterprise shall have legal personality.
A public enterprise may not be held liable beyond its total assets;
An enterprise shall follow the laws and systems of free market.
Without prejudice to the provision of Sub-Article 3 of this Article where found necessary the government may order the enterprises directly to intervene for the benefit of the public.
Address
The address of an enterprise shall be the place where its head office is situated and may have branch offices as may be necessary.
CHAPTER THREE
Organization and Management of an Enterprise
Organization
Any public development enterprise shall have the following organisation:
Board,
A General Manager and a Deputy General Manager as may be necessary;
The necessary staff.
Powers and Duties of the Authority
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Authority given by other laws, the Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Cause public enterprises to submit a plan and performance report; analyze;follow up; evaluate its performance and give feedback.
Propose the chairperson and members of the Board of public enterprises for appointment and assignment to the President of the Regional Government.
Fix allowance to be paid to the members of the Board, follow up its implementation.
Decide the standard of public enterprise based upon their capital and manner of establishment.
Cause the allocation of initial capital of the enterprises by the government.
Cause the allocation of reserve fund or funds by the Government so that the authorized capital of a newly established public enterprise to be fully paid up within five years.
Follow up, cause the implementation of the amount to be paid to government from net profit of the public enterprises.
Upon the request of the board, submit a request with its recommendation to the Administrative Council of the Government the amount of state dividend to be given to an enterprise, execute upon approval.
Undertake study on a means of building the capacity of public enterprises for effective achievements of their objectives, submit it to the Administrative Council of the Government, upon approval follow up its implementation.
Submit purchase plan of fixed assets that is necessary for the activities of an enterprise; submit to the Administrative Council for approval; cause its implementation upon approval.The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Issue Directives with regards to writing off the accounts of public enterprises and follow up its implementation.
Formulate policy with regards to public enterprises, execute upon approval; provide strategic directions for public enterprises.
Without prejudice to the powers and duties given to the Board, perform other functions necessary for the protections of the ownership rights of the state.
Members of the Board
Based on the standard of the enterprise,the number of members of the Board may be from five to eleven.
Not more than one third of the members of the Board shall be elected by the general assembly of the permenant workers. The rest of the members of the Board shall be appointed by the Authority.
The members of the Board shall be appointed or elected on the basis of their profession, experience and competence.
Any member of a Board may also be appointed as a Board member of any other non competing enterprise.
The term of office of the members of the Board shall be three years; where necessary a member of a Board may be reelected or reassigned at the expiry of his term of office for the next one term only.
Where any member of the Board resigns from membership, the chairperson of the Board shall bring the matter to the attention of the Authority so that another person is assigned in the same manner.
Where a member of the Board could not fulfill his responsibilities effectively;was consecutively absent from a meeting more than three times or was absent for or more than five times in one fiscal year, the Authority submits a proposal for his dismissal to the organ that assigned him.
Meeting Procedures of the Board
The Board shall have a regular meet ing at least once a month.
The chairperson shall call a meeting where there is an urgent matter or where at least more than fifty percent of the members of the Board so request.
The agenda of the meeting shall be communicated to the Board members in advance.
The meeting commences where a majority of the members are present.
The Board shall take a decision by a majority vote, in case of a tie the chairperson shall have a casting vote.
The Board shall have a minute signed by the members.
The Board shall select and assign a secretary from among the employees of the enterprise.
The General Manager of the enterprise shall attend meetings of the Board without having the right to vote.
The Board shall draw its own working procedure.
Powers and Duties of the Board
The accountability of the board shall be to the Authority, and shall have the following powers and duties:
Appoint and dismiss the General Manager of the enterprise and decide his salary and allowance.
Propose to the Authority for the increase or decrease of the enterprise's capital.
Submit books of account to external and internal auditors, also periodic reports on the state of activities and financial reports of an enterprise to the Authority.
Study and propose the purchase of equipment and fixed asset that are necessary for the enterprise; and based on the decision cause to be implemented. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Approve the sale of fixed asset that is not necessary for the enterprise.
Ensure that books of accounts and properities of the enterprise are kept properly.
Without prejudice to Article 27 of this Proclamation, the Board may request the Authority for additional contingency fund and upon permission cause to be assigned, and decide on its use.
Approves the enterprises’ work plan, budget and internal regulations,follow up and report its implementation to the Authority.
Approves the employment, assignment,salary and allowance of those officers of the enterprise accountable to the General Manager.
Prepare strategic plan compatible with the mission of the enterprises based on the direction given from the Authority, and submit it for approval; upon approval cause its implementation.
Accountability of the Board Members
The members of the Board, shall carry out their powers and duties with due care.
The members of Board shall be accountable individually and jointly for the damage caused on the enterprise by their failure to perform properly.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 2 of this Article, a Board member who dissented from the decision should have to write and sign specifying his point of dissent so as not to be held accountable.
Powers and Duties of the General Manager of a Public Enterprise
The accountability of the General Manager shall be to the Board and have the following powers and duties:
Plan organize, direct, administer and control the activities of the enterprise.
Represent the enterprise in dealing with third parties.
Subject to the approval of the Board,employ, assign and define the functions of officers accountable to him.
Employ, assign, dismiss and determine the salary and allowance of other employees of the enterprises in accordance with its internal regulation and labor law.
Keeps proper books of accounts of the enterprise, and opens and operate bank accounts of the enterprise.
Shall sell fixed assets not needed by the enterprise based upon the approval of the Board and Directives of the Authority to be issued.
Prepare and submit to the Board the internal regulation as well as the work plan and budget of the enterprise and implement the same upon approval.
Implement and cause the implementation of the decisions of the Board.
Establish and preside over the meetings of the management committee;participate and brief, and submit a report on performance evaluation meetings conducted by the Authority.
Prepare a strategic plan inline with the directions set by the Board, submit to the Board for approval, implement and cause to implemented upon approval.
Perform other duties assigned to it by the Board.
Responsiblity and Liability of the General Manager
The General Manager shall be liable for the damage he causes on the enterprise through negligence or intentionally in the process of dispensing his responsibility.
CHAPTER FOUR
Capital of Public Enterprise
Capital Needed to Establish a Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall have a capital.
The Authority shall cause the initial capital needed to be allocated by the Administrative Council.
The capital of an enterprise may be in cash or in kind.
Where it is paid in kind the Authority shall ensure that the property is correctly valued in accordance with Article 5 and Sub-Article 1 (a) of this Proclamation or conforms with the book value thereof.
Paid Up and Authorized Capital
The amount of the paid up capital of an enterprise at the time of its establishment shall not be less than 25% of its authorized capital.
The authorized capital of an enterprise shall be fully paid up within five years from the date of its establishment.
Where the authorized capital is not fully paid up as provided under sub- Article 2 of this Article, the Authority shall, without prejudice to the right of the third parties adjust the capital to the level of the paid up capital.
Increase of Authorized Capital
The Authority may cause the funds needed to increase the capital of an enterprise to be allocated by the Government or to be paid out of the income of the enterprise.
Decreasing of Capital
The capital of an enterprise may without prejudice to the right of third parties to decrease, where:
The auditor proposes for the capital to be decreased;
It was decided for the capital to decrease following a proposal submitted by the Board;
The authorized capital of the enterprise has not been fully paid as provided for under Sub-Article 2 of Article 18 of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER FIVE
Name and Trademark of a Public Enterprise
Name of a Public Enterprise
The name of a public enterprise is the name under which the enterprise carries on its activities and shall clearly designate such activities.
The enterprise shall not go against government policy and offend the moral of the society, and also it shall not prejudice the right of third parties.
An enterprise shall display its name outside its premises.
Restrictions in the Use of the Name
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of the name of a public enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation and prohibit such enterprise from using the name giving rise to this dispute.
Trademark
A trademark is a name, designation,emblem or any other distinctive sign used by an public enterprise to distinguish its goods and services.
Restrictions in the Use of Trademarks
A public enterprise may choose any kind of trademark.
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of a trademark of an enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
Before the trademark is used, it shall be registered by the appropriate governmentoffice and published in a news paper with wider circulation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Sub-Article 2 of this Article and/or prohibit such enterprise from using the trademark giving rise to the dispute.
CHAPTER SIX
Accounts and Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
SECTION ONE
Public Enterprise Accounts
Accounting Principles
Any public enterprise shall keep books of accounts following a generally accepted accounting principles. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Financial Year, Closing of Accounts and Financial Reports
The financial year of an enterprise shall be from July 1st to June 30th E.C.
Any public enterprise shall close its accounts at least once a year.
The annual closing of accounts shall be completed within three months following the end of the financial year and shall be open to an external auditor.
The enterprise shall prepare work performance report on plans of major activities and program to the Authority.
Failure to close, in due time, the account of an enterprise in accordance with Sub-Article 2 of this Article may entail liability.
Reserve Funds and Its Utilization
Any public enterprise shall have a legal reserve fund.
Any public enterprise shall annually transfer 5 % of its net profit to legal reserve fund until such fund equals 20 % of the capital of the enterprise.
The legal reserve fund may be utilized for covering:
) Losses, and
) Unforeseeable expenses and liabilities;
The Board of any public enterprise with the approval of the Authority, may cause the enterprises to secure other reserve funds and may decide on its usalization. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Payment of Taxes and Duties
The relevant laws concerning taxes and duties shall be applicable on the enterprises.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the right of an enterprise to be exempted from taxes and duties under any other law, shall be effective.
Payment of State Dividend
Public enterprises shall pay state dividend within six months from the end of the budget year and deposit to the bank account of the Government development fund.
SECTION TWO
Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
Assignment of an Auditor
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Auditor General of Oromia given by the law, the account of each enterprise shall be audited by an external auditor approved by the Authority.
The Authority shall ascertain that the external auditors assigned satisfies the criteria set by the Office of Auditor General of Oromia and that they are free from any form of influence.
The Authority shall determine the term of an external auditor.
Obligation to Cooperate for Audit
Any person who has received, paid or expended or is in charge of the accounts of the money or property of the enterprise being audited shall, when requested have the obligation to produce to the enternal and external auditors the accounts to be audited and to provide the necessary information.
Accountability, Power, Duties of an Auditor
Accountability, power and duties of auditors related to this Proclamation is applicable in consistence with the commercial and civil codes.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Amalgamation and Division of Public Enterprises
Basic Principle
Two or more enterprise may be amalgamated by the decision of the Administrative Council and form a new enterprise or take over one enterprise.
An enterprise may be divided by the decision of the Administrative Council in to two or more enterprises.
The decision to amalgamate or divide shall be effected based on research proposal presented by the Authority.
Before amalgamation or division of the enterprises, the Authority shall inform the interest and accountability of the third party.
In the event that an enterprise which is being considered for amalgamation or division has obligation towards creditors, no decision shall be takento amalgamate or divide, if the enterprise resulting from the amalgamation or division is unable to meet the obligation towards the creditors.
The accounts of an enterprise to be amalgamated or divided shall be closed and audited from the beginning of the financial year up to the date of the amalgamation or division.
Transfer of Right and Obligation
The rights and obligation of an amalgameted enterprise shall be transferred to the newly created enterprise.
The Authority shall prepare a proposal with regards to the distribution of the rights and obligations among the enterprises divided and the newly established enterprises resulting from the division.
The proposal prepared by the Authority shall be submitted to the Administrative Council for decision; up on approval a copy shall be sent to the newly established enterprises.
As provided here under Sub-Article 3 of this Article, the Authority shall put the major points of decisions passed in a notice either on Afan Oromo, Amharic or English newspaper with wider circulation.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, where there is an obligation entered with a third party previously, the new enterprises resulting from the division shall be individually and jointly liable towards the creditors.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Dissolution and Winding–up of Accounts
Grounds for Dissolution of an Enterprise
An enterprise may be dissolved for any one of the following reasons;
On the expiry of the life of the enterprise fixed in its establishment law;
Completion of the venture for which the enterprise is established;
Failure to achieve the purpose of the enterprises and where its implementation is found to be impossibile;
Loss of fifty percent of the paid up capital or due to bankruptcy;
Where the Administrative Council passes a decision to dissolve the enterprise;
Decision of the court declaring the enterprise bankrupt.
Appointment, Duties and Powers of Liquidators
Where cases referred under Article 34 of this Proclamation occur, the Authority shall assign one or more liquidators outside the employees of the enterprise in line with the criteria set by the Auditor General.
The Authority may dismiss the liquidators and appoint other liquidators for good cause.
The liquidators shall take over the books and accounts of the enterprise under liquidation.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the liquidators shall take over the property of the enterprise and manage it.
Liquidators have the powers and duties of the Board and the General Manager given by this Proclamation.
The liquidators may not undertake new business other than the execution of contracts still running with third party or where the interests of the winding up so require.
The Board shall prepare a report for the liquidators on the affairs of the enterprise covering the period from the end of the last financial year to the date the winding-up started.
The liquidators and the Board shall jointly prepare and sign a statement of affairs summarizing the rights and obligations of the enterprise.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the Board and the General Manager shall assist the liquidators in carrying out their duties.
Calling on Creditors
The liquidators shall inform creditors of the proposed dissolution of the enterprise and require them to file their claims with supporting documents.
Liquidators shall notify to the creditors by notice published in three successive weekly issued newspaper with wider circulation.
A notification shall be sent to those creditors whose address is known.
Creditors may submit their claims within 90 days from the date the letter is delivered or from the last issue of the notice in the news paper.
The liquidators shall prepare and submit financial statement of the enterprise and sequential term payment of a debt if any, and report to the Authority.
The Authority, after taking into consideration the financial statement and recommendation prepared by the liquidators shall decide the payment of the debt.
) Authorize the payment of creditors who have filed their claims.
) Where the balance of the enterprise is not sufficient to cover the debt due to creditors, authorize the liquidators to sell assets of the enterprise based on the Directive to be issued without affecting the right of the third party.
Where the total assets of the enterprise are not sufficient to pay off its debts and the authorized capital is not fully paid up, the liquidators shall submit to the Authority for the payment of the debt.
Provision of Creditors
Where known creditors have failed to file their claims within the time limit specified under Article 37 Sub-Article 4 of this Proclamation, the amounts due to them shall be deposited in a bank to the names of the creditors.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 37 Sub-Article 4, after the enterprise ceased to exist, creditors not cited in the books of the enterprise may claim from the surplus assets collected by the Government, provided their failure to claim within the time-limit was due to force majeure. Where the creditors have not been paid due to the liquidator's negligence, the liquidators shall be accountable.
Sums shall be set aside to meet claims in respect of undertakings of the enterprise which are not completed or disputed claims where the creditors have not been guaranteed until the dispute is settled.
Final Balance Sheet and Publication of Notice of Dissolution
After the money to the creditors have been set aside to meet potential claims pursuant to Article 38 Sub-Article 1 of this Proclamation, the liquidators shall prepare a final balance sheet showing surplus assets, if any, and submit the same to Authority.
The liquidators shall submit a copy of the balance sheet to Auditor General's Office and Oromia Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
The Auditor General shall promptly forward its comments, if any, to Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
As per the permission of Finance and Economic Development Bureau, the Authority approve the final balance sheet, and shall submit the dissolution proposal to the Administrative Council and cause its approval.
The Administrative Council shall then repeal the establishment Proclamation and bylaws of the enterprise.
The enterprise's right and obligation shall cease to exist as of the date of repeal of its establishment Proclamation.
The books of the dissolved enterprise shall be deposited with the Authority where they shall be kept for ten years. Any interested organ may inspect such books after payment of the prescribed fee.
Assets Due to the Government
Any surplus assets of an enterprise dissolved and liquidated shall devolve to the Government account.
CHAPTER NINE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power to Issue Regulation
The Administrative Council may issue a Regulation for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Applicable Laws
Ethiopian Commercial and civil code shall be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
The Regional State Enterprises Proclamation No. 16/1997 is hereby repealed by this Proclamation.
Laws and practices inconsistent with this Proclamation, shall have no effect with respect to matters provided for in this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall enter into force as of the 14th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of the National Regional
State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 14th of July 2013
Proclamation No. 182/2013
Proclamation Licensing and Administration of Advocates and Paralegals of Oromia National Regional State
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to provide a system through which legal profession and law firms are guided by to ensure the rule of law and to meet the objective of the justice system;
WHEREAS, it is necessary for the public to get quality advocacy service from professionals engaged in advocacy service;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to upgrade the criteria required to be licensedand professional ethics could be fulfilled with a view of harmonizing competency of advocates working in Oromia Region;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to make legal the work of paralegal to determine conditions of granting license, administration and other related matters;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3) (a) of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia Proclamation No. 46/2001, it is herby proclaimed as follows:
Part One
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Proclamation Licensing and Administration of Advocates and Paralegals Proclamation No. 182/2013.”
Definitions
Unless the contexts require otherwise in this proclamation:
“Public Prosecutor” means a person who employed by Oromia Justice Bureau or other governmental offices working with prosecutor profession in this institutions.
“Advocate” means a person who is granted an advocacy license to render advocacy service.
“Paralegal” means a person who is registered and granted license in accordance with this proclamation and rendering services to client by preparing application or various contracts with consideration.
“Bureau” means Oromia Justice Bureau.
“Law Firm” means a firm established by partnership agreements of two or more advocates who are granted with principal license to render advocacy service.
“Law Clerk” means a person who is registered in accordance with this proclamation and submits suits or applications prepared by advocate before the court, open files and serve summon, order of court and copy of court decision for concerned bodies.
“License” means a certificate issued for advocates or law firms to render advocacy service or paralegals to render writing service related to law.
“Client” means a person who enters in to contracts with advocate or paralegal or law firm to obtain services for himself or for third party or who has told facts of the case.
“Court” means the Oromia National Regional State Courts or the quasijudicial organ authorized by law.
“Member” means a person who is a share holder of law Firm.
“Person” means any physical or judicial person.
“Advocacy Service” means pleading courts, rendering legal consultancy service or preparation of contracts or any documents to be adduced before the court, or memorandum of association, document of establishment or amendment or dissolution of an organization with or without or direct or indirect future consideration.
“Legal Profession Service” means graduate with law from legally recognized college or University and giving legal service.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this Proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall be applicable on an advocate, a law firm and paralegal licensed from the Region.
Part Two
Licensing and Registration of Advocates
Rendering of Advocacy Service
Any person who wants to render advocacy service in the Region shall be an Ethiopian and must have license granted to him from the Region.
Without prejudice to sub article(1) of this Article, the following may render advocacy service without advocacy license:
 A person who plead his own case;
 A person who without payment plead the case of his spouse, parents, children, grandparents, sisters, brothers or person to whom his tutor or guardian;
 A prosecutor pleading in his official capacity;
 A head, a partner, or an agent represented by the head of an organization or company who pleads the case of the organization or company holding a power of attorney to represent such organization or company in court;
 An attorney , an official of public body or public enterprise who pleads the actions of such public body or public enterprise;
 Chairperson of employee’s or employer's trade union or a person represented from among the members of the union.
Documents Submitted With License Application
An application for advocacy license shall be duly completed in a form prepared by the Bureau and attached with the necessary documents.
The following documents shall be attached with the application submitted in compliance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article:
 Credential in law bestowed on him from legally recognized educational institution;
 Job experience showing that the applicant has been working in law profession;
 Evidence from the concerned body showing that the applicant is free from criminal records forthe last four years;
 Evidence showing that he had taken the examination as necessary to get a license and passed;
 Evidence from his former employer in the last 4 years regarding his conduct and performance;
 Permanent residence and place of business;
 Clearance and evidence of release from his job; and
 Other documents provided in regulation or directives that will be issued.
Document lodged in accordance with Sub-Article 2 (d) of this Article shall be accepted only where it is lodged within three months starting from day when his passing the examination is known.
Granting of License
Where the application is submitted with the attached documents in accordance with Article 6 of this Proclamation, the Bureau shall issue license for the applicant within 10 days starting from the time when the Examination is given.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, where the examination is not given in accordance with this Proclamation Article 15 Sub-Article 2 the Bureau shall issue a license from the day when the applicant submits his application with full attached document within 5 days.
Where the application has been rejected, the Bureau shall notify the reason for the applicant.
The advocacy license shall contain the following:
 The name, age and nationality of the advocate;
 Address of the advocate’s residence and place of business;
 Type of license and its validity date;
 Name and signature of the issuing officer.
Types of License
The type of advocacy license shall be principal and special.
Principal Advocacy License
Principal advocacy license granted by the Bureau shall have 1st and 2nd level.
Criteria to be Fulfilled In order to Get Any Level of Advocacy License
1st or 2 nd level of advocacy license shall fulfill the following criteria:
 Who can work with the working language of the Region;
 Who observes the constitution and laws of the country and the region, cause its observance;
 Who passes the advocacy profession examination;
 Having proper conduct for justice system;
 Who is not legally or judicially interdicted from rendering advocacy service;
 Not being accused and penalized with disciplinary breach in the last four years;
 Not being penalized with severe disciplinary breach in the last two years; and
 Where he is six months or more after he left his job.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the following criteria shall be additionally fulfilled in order to get 2nd level advocacy license:
 Graduating with a degree in law from a legally recognized institution and four years experience in law profession; or,
 Graduating with a diploma in law from a legally recognized law institution and an experience of six years or more in law profession.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the following criteria shall be additionally fulfilled in order to get 1st level advocacy license:
 Graduating with a degree in law from a legally recognized institution and six years experience in law profession; or,
 Graduating with a diploma in law from a legally recognized law institution and an experience of eight years or more in law profession. The implementationof this Article shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Limitation of Power in Advocacy Service
An advocate who has 2nd level license may render advocacy service for cases that fall under the jurisdiction of Wereda court.
An advocate who has 1st level license may render advocacy service for cases that fall under the jurisdiction of all Regional courts.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, any advocate with a 2nd level license who started a case on Wereda court may follow up it at any level of appellate courts.
Special Advocacy License
A person who has fulfilled requirements under Article 10 of this Proclamation, who plead for the rights and interest of public and private person to be respected without any kind of payment shall be granted a special license.
Provisions provided under Article 9 and 11 of this Proclamation shall be applicable on special advocacy license.
Revising Level of Advocacy License
Advocate who has a 2nd level license where his job experience or his academic level permits him 1st level advocacy license may request the Bureau to revise his license.
Advocacy License Examination
The Bureau shall:
Prepare and give an examination or cause to be given to applicants for an issuance of a license.
Mark examination paper, determine the pass mark and publicize the result.
Sitting for an Examination
Any person who fulfills the requirements listed under Article 6 of this Proclamation up on paying the registration fee shall take the advocacy license examination.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, it is not necessary to give an examination for persons who has an experience of six years or more rendering service as a judge, or prosecutor or a teacher of law in legally recognized colleges or university.
An Oath
Any advocate who is granted with a license, before starting his work shall take the following oath by the Bureau head or by his representative: I _____________ when taking this advocacy license from the Bureau, promise that I will give due respect and cause to be respected the constitution and laws of the country and the Region, is committed to achieve the mission of the justice system, by working with a proper ethical conduct, honest and free from corruption, honesty and cause the interest and benefit of my clients in accordance with the law, work with understanding and respect with my opponents and persons who has law profession like me, and to under way my obligation in ensuring rule of law.
Part Three
Law Firm
Establishment of a Law Firm
Two or more advocates who have the principal advocacy license with similar status may establish professional law firm by partnership agreement.
A professional law firm which is established in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article shall be a limited liability ordinary partnership and shall bear the phrase “limited liability ordinary partnership” next to its name
The professional law firm established in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article shall be established to render only advocacy service.
Application for License
Application for law firm license shall be filled in a form prepared by the Bureau and shall be submitted with the relevant documents.
The application submitted in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article shall be presented with the following authenticated document:
 Memorandum of Association of law firm;
 Bylaw of a law firm;
 Copies of advocacy license given to the head and members of the firm.
Issuance of License
Where application is submitted with full compliance in accordance with Article 18 of this Proclamation bythe law firm,the Bureau shall issue a license within 5 days starting from the date of application .
Where the application for law firm license has been rejected, the Bureau shall notify the applicant the ground thereon.
The license issued for the law firm shall include the followings:
 Name of the law firm,
 The regular working address,
 License certificate number,
 Issuance date and year of the law firm; and
 Name and signature of the person who issued the license.
Unless the law firm is granted a license from the Bureau, it can not render advocacy service.
A law firm shall have a legal Personality as of the day of its license issuance.
Members to Law Firm
Membership to a law firm is allowed only for advocates with principal advocacy license according to this Proclamation.
Member’s Obligation
Any person who is a member of one law firm shall not render advocacy service in his private capacity and be a member of another law firm.
Notwithstanding to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, an advocate may finish cases he has started before being a member of a law firm or pleads cases in accordance with Article 5 Sub-Article 2 (a) and (b) of this Proclamation.
Any advocate, who is a member of a law firm and release a law firm shall keep the secrets he knew because of his membership.
Shall not render professional advocacy service for any person who has pleading with law firm he has been a member.
Revision of Memorandum of Association
Where a Memorandum of Association of law firm is revised, shall be lodged to the Bureau and ratified.
Obligation to Serve Professionally
An advocate who is a member of a law firm shall render advocacy service without interruption unless otherwise he is sick, on leave or in force majore.
Merging and Division of Law Firm
Two or more law firms may merge in accordance with the law and its memorandum of association; rights and obligations of the merged firms shall be transferred to the newly formed one's.
A firm may be divided in accordance with the law and it’s memorandum of association; rights and obligations of the divided firm shall be transferred equally to the newly formed firms.
The merged and divided firm shall be registered in accordance with this Proclamation.
Applicable of Provisions of Commercial Code
The provisions of Commercial Code which are applicable on ordinary partnership shall also be applicable on law firm as may be necessary.
Accountability
The head of a law firm shall ensure whether advocates and other workers working in the firm respect professional ethics.
Any law firm which render advocacy service shall be liable to correct any injury sustained by its client in accordance with civil law.
Being a member of a law firm and rendering advocacy service shall not disregard the lawful relationship between an advocate and a client, and the accountability for professional ethics.
Revocation of License
A law Firm License shall be revoked due to the following reasons:
 Where the firm phases out;
 Where the firm is found practicing contrary to the license issued and its objective;
 Where the dissolution of the firm is decided in accordance with the law;
 Where it is found that the members of the firm are below two, or
 Where it is found performing unlawful act or does not pay tax.
The Bureau before making a decision in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article, allows the firm’s agent to forward his opinion, where the agent is not found at his registrered address it shall give necessary decision depending on the available evidence.
A law firm whose license has been revoked shall pay some amount of money stated in the Regulation to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation up on the receipt of the document of the revoked license.
The decision of revoked of license passed by the Bureau in accordance with this Proclamation shall come in to effect up on the notice issuance on the Newspaper.
PART FOUR
Common Provisions
Service Fee
Advocates or law firm shall pay service fee for service given to it.
The type of service and its execution shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Advocates or law firm may request a reasonable service fee for service he renders to his client, shall give a receipt upon receiving the service fee; the amount of the service fee shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Organizing Files
The Bureau, in accordance with this Proclamation shall organize a register in which particulars of the advocates and the law firm are registered and sshall be open to the public.
Employment and Registration
An advocate or law firm may employ assistance advocates and other employees needed for the work.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, an advocate or a law firm may not employ the following person as asistance of advocates:
 A person whose advocacy license is revoked or suspended;
 A person dismissed from office due to disciplinary infringement;
 A person charged for and convicted in an office and not reinstated;
 A permanent public servant.
Any advocate or law firm shall notice and caused to be registered law clerk and other employees employed with their name and job description to the Bureau within 15 days starting from the day when employment has taken place.
Notwithstanding to Sub-Article 2 (a) and (b) of this Article an advocate or law firm may employ as law clerk a person whose advocacy license is revoked or suspended or a person dismissed from office due to disciplinary infringement where time limit for his reinstatment is over or passed by this Proclamation or civil service law.
Notification of Change
Advocate or law firm who obtained advocacy license in accordance with this Proclamation shall notify in writing any change or improvement to the Bureau within fifteen days from the day the change is made.
Replacing a License
A lost or damaged license of an advocate or a law firm shall be replaced up on submitting of a written application to the Bureau and payment thereof.
Renewal of License
An advocacy or law firm license shall be renewed annually and it is executed from Hamle 1 up to 30 of Ethiopian calendar.
Advocate or law firm who may not renew his advocacy license with in time limit stated under Sub-Article 1 of this Article, may with additional fee renew up to Meskerem 30 of Ethiopian Calendar.
An advocate or law firm who failed to renew advocacy license within the time limit provided under Sub-Article 2 of this Article by force majeure may apply to the Bureau for the renewal.
Any request for renewal of advocate's or law firm's license shall include the following particulars:
 A document showing the taxpayment of that year;
 A document showing that he renders free advocacy service to persons who are unable to hire an advocate for 50 or more hours annually;
 Document showing that he has taken training given by the Bureau in that year.
System by which free advocacy service is followed up and reported shall be provided by the Bureau and Oromia Supreme Court.
An a pplicant shall pay renewal fee that will be stated in the Regulation issued in accordance with this Proclamation.
Returning a License
Any advocate or law firm shall return his license to the Bureau temporarily or permanently, as the case may be where mainly engaged, in any activity outside the profession or is not in a position to render professional services up on any other ground.
Any advocate or law firm who has returned his license in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article may re-take same up on removal of the cause that compeled him to return his license ceases to exist or removed within one year with payment there on, if he has not committed any fault which would make him liable legally.
Giving of Training
Bureau may give or cause to be given training which assists to improve rendering of advocacy service.
Unless in force majeure, any advocates have a duty to take a training given by the Bureau.
PART FIVE
Disciplinary Breaches and Penalties
Severe Disciplinary Offences
The following shall be regarded as severe disciplinary offences:
Failing to achieve his obligation in pleading;
Failing to keep any personal or organizational secret or information of a customer obtained because of his profession;
Rendering advocacy service where there is conflict of interest;
Failing to keep client's property and document properly;
Rendering advocacy service without renewing a license;
Giving fraudulent or false explanation about himself or his organization or service he renders;
Giving false information for a 3rd party about his client's case regarding facts or legal issue;
Committing acts contrary to the constitution and constitutional order;
Being punished twice or more with simple disciplinary breach;
Rendering advocacy service using a suspended license;
Getting an advocacy license with a fraudulent document or statement or through mischief;
Convicted of stealing, committing forgery or fraudulent act or being an offender of a crime intentionally committed entailing to more than three years imprisonment;
Found rendering advocacy service in his private statues while he is a member of a law firm or being a member in two or more law firms in violation of the provision of Article 21 Sub- Article 1 of this Proclamation;
Rendering advocacy service on cases he has been an arbitrator, a judge, prosecutor or cases he had pleaded when he was an agent of his previous office;
Rendering advocacy service on specific case for conflicting parties;
Asking or making a client pay more than the permissible payment;
Rendering advocacy service beyond the power limitation of his license;
Preparing statement of claim without facts told to him by a client and proceed pleading;
Being absent from trial without ample cause;
Making his client pay for advocacy service he render in statues of special advocacy license;
Giving or attempting to give money or property of his client or other customer to a judge, prosecutor or to other workers of the justice sector;
Begging another for his client or other person cases;
Drinking and intoxicated, using addictive leaves or found in a place which undermines the respect of advocacy profession; or
Performing activities which undermine advocacy profession on his client or on another person.
Simple Disciplinary Breach
The following shall be regarded as simple disciplinary breaches.
Failing to renew advocacy license without sufficient ground;
Employing a law clerk contrary to Article 30 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation;
Failing to notify and cause to be registered law clerk or other workers employed or any change or improvement by violating Article 30 Sub-Article 3 and Article 31 of this Proclamation;
Disturbing or commiting acts that undermine human dignity where disciplinary cases lodged against him is proceeding or where he is getting service;
Failing to give correct information regarding the condition to his client on time.
Objective, Types and Categories of Disciplinary Measures
The objective of advocate disciplinary measure is to protect clients, society, the justice system and legal professions from advocates who does not fulfill or fail to perform their duties and responsibilities properly.
The following disciplinary measures may be imposed by considering severity of disciplinary breaches on advocate or law firm:
 Written warning;
 A fine from 1,000-10,000 Birr;
 A fine of more than 10,000 up to 20,000 Birr;
 Suspension license for not more than one year; or
 Cancelation of advocacy license.
Measure stated under Sub-Article 2(a) of this Article is categorized as simple disciplinary measure.
Measure described under Sub-Article 2 (b) - (e) of this Article are categorized as severe disciplinary measures.
Decision of Disciplinary Measure
The Commission, by considering the damages occurred or would have occurred may decide one or more disciplinary measures described under Article 38 of this Proclamation.
Releasing Suspended or Revoked Advocacy License
The suspended advocacy license shall be released for an advocate or a law firm as soon as the suspension period is lapsed.
An advocate or a law firm whose advocacy license has been revoked may apply for the reinstatement of the license by stating the correction of faults or shortcoming that is a ground for revocation of license by respecting professional ethics.
The Bureau may decide the advocacy license to be given by examining the application submitted in accordance with Sub-Article 2 of this Article.
When passing a decision as per Sub- Article 3 of this Article, the Bureau, shall take in to consideration measures taken by the advocate or the law firm to implement obligations provided under Article 42 of this Proclamation.
Temporary Suspension
The Commission may suspend an advocate or a law firm where a crime of which he/it is accused or a severe disciplinary breach committed is found to have a negative impact on justice administration system.
Obligation of an Advocate or Law
Firm of Which His/Its Advocacy License is Suspended or Revoked An advocate or law firm of which his/ its advocacy license is suspended or revoked shall notifying the reason in writting transfer the case and evidence that is in his hand to the client or advocate or law firm that the client choses within 10 days starting from date of suspension or revocation.
Accusation and Charge
A person who wants to give information or put forward an accusation on an advocate or a law firm may explain the type of the disciplinary breache, the place where the evidence or the information is found, date and place where the breach occurred and other matters to the Bureau or Justice Offices found at different levels in person or through telephone, postal service, or any other suitable means.
The Bureau shall present the information given in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article to the Commission.
Where the Commission, after examining the information and accusation ensures the existence of sufficient evidence shall send a summon to be served for an advocate or law firm by his/its registered address to present his/its statement in person within 10 days starting from the date the summon is served.
Where the accused is not found at the place where he has been registered,the notice shall be posted on notice board of the court or justice office found around the place where he is working.
Defendant Failing to Appear
Where the defendent did not appear after being served a summon or by a posted summon in accordance with Sub-Article 3 and 4 of Article 43 of this Proclamation, the Commission may look into the case in his absence.
Where the defendant submits a formal complaint supported by evidence showing that he had been absent with sufficient grounds within 90 days from the time when the decision is given, the Commission may order the case to be heared in the the presence of the advocate.
Waiving Accusation or Charge
Withdrawal of the accuser or the charge of the case shall not prohibit the Commission from entertaining the case and passng a decision.
Obtaining the Copy of an Evidence
Any party who wants to obtain evidence regarding the charge of the defendant may take a copy of the document with his own expense.
Adjourning the Date of the Hearing
Where necessary, the commission may decide to hear the case in an alternate day on its own initiation or by the request of the defendant.
When adjourning the date in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article the Commission shall notify the concerned person.
Amendment of Charge of Statement of Defense
Where the Commission believes that the charge against the defendant shall be amended, it may do so.
Where it is found that the amended charge might harm the defendant, the Commission shall adjourn the date to let the defendant submit a complete statement of defense.
The Commission on its own initiation or up on the request of the accused, may order the amendment of the charge or statement of defense.
Examining and Giving Decision of Disciplinary Accusation
The Commission up on examination of the lodged charge and evidence may revoke the charge or take disciplinary measures in accordance with Article 39 of this Proclamation.
The decision given by the Commission shall be final unless it has error of law.
An advocate penalized with disciplinary measure may not be free from criminal liability.
An advocate penalized with criminal liability measure may not be free from disciplinary measure.
Revision of Decision
Where the disciplinary measure taken on an advocate or law firm proved to be on false documents,testimony or illegally, the Commission may re-examine the case and pass appropriate decision.
Where the concerned party realizes the case and claims there on and submit an appeal for the case to be re-examined within one month, the Commission may do so in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article.
Appeal
Any party who has a complaint that the decision of the Commission have error of law, may appeal to Oromia Supreme Court within 30 days after the decision.
The court shall give its decision based only on error of law without looking into the main issue and send it back to the Bureau.
The Commission shall reconsider the case on the bases of the decision of the court.
Period of Limitation
Accusation regarding sever disciplinary breach against an advocate shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within two years starting from the day it has been committed.
Accusation regarding simple disciplinary breach against an advocate shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within one year starting from the day it has been committed.
Retaining Time of Penalty Record
Penalty of sever disciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against an advocate after a lapse of two years starting from the day when penalty decision has been passed.
Penalty of simple disciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against an advocate after a lapse of one year starting from the day when the penalty decision has been passed.
PART SIX
Commission of Disciplinary Matters of Advocates
Establishment
Commission of Disciplinary Matter of Advocates of Oromia Region here after called “Commission” shall be established by this Proclamation
The Commission of Disciplinary Matters of Advocate may be established at Zonal level; the condition of establishment, powers and duties of this Commission shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Members of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following members:
 Head of the Bureau ... chairperson,
Vice head of the Bureau ... Deputy chairperson,
 Two prosecutors assigned by the head of the Bureau ... member,
 One judge from the Supreme Court ... member,
 Two advocates assigned by Advocate's Association ... member;
Term of office of a member shall be two years.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 2 of this Article, any member may be elected again.
Powers and Duties of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
Examine and give decision on an accusation lodged against an advocate or law firm for violating this Proclamation or Regulation issued in accordance with this Proclamation.
Cause any decision given in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article to be registered in private file of an advocate.
Where it is ensured that the evidence is sufficient to entertain the charge against an advocate or law firm the charge is sent with a notice for him/ it to submit a statement of defense within 15 days.
After examining charges and evidence against an advocate or law firm as well as the statement of defense and the evidence to support it:
 Where the charge is not correct or is not supported by sufficient evidence, it cancels the charge and let an advocate or law firm free.
 Where the charge is correct and supported by sufficient evidence it evaluates the gravity of the breach committed and decide one of the penalties described under Article 38 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
Examine and give decision on an advocate or law firm where he did not return his license in accordance with Article 34 Sub-Article 1 of this Proclamation.
Based on Article 41 of this Proclamation suspend license of an advocate or law firm for temporarily.
Give order on the condition of the execution of the decision; cause it to be executed.
Assign the secretary of the Commission.
Prepare directives regarding its work procedure.
Meeting Procedure of the Commission
The Commission shall have regular meeting once in a month and it may call urgent meeting as may be necessary.
It shall be a quorum where morethan fifty percent of the members of the Commission are present.
Decision shall be passed by majority vote, in case of a tie the decision supported by the chairperson shall be the decision of the Commission.
PART SEVEN
Paralegals
Rendering service of paralegal
Any paralegal shall prepare legal application or different contract in accordance with the law and the request of his client.
Put his signature and the name stamp describing his name and job on the application he wrote.
Any paralegal shall not give any service other than described under Sub-Article 1 of this Article.
Any paralegal shall have permanent address at a place where he gives service.
The service shall be given only by the paralegal who acquired a license.
Any paralegal may render a service by organizing in partnership based on a Regulation or Directive to be issued.
Registration and Grant of License
A paralegal shall register and acquired license from the Justice Office found in the Zone he wants to render service in.
Any paralegal shall not render service described under Article 58 of this Proclamation unless he is registered and granted a license.
Requirements to be Licensed
To acquire a license the following requirements shall be fulfilled:
Who can work with the region language;
Observe, cause the observance of the constitutions and laws of the country and the region;
Who submits documents showing that he has taken training related to law for not less than three months or have an experience related to law for one year or have been working as a paralegal for the last three consecutive years or that he has law education;
Present documents showing his educational status to be grade 10 or above;
Documents showing that he has good conduct;
Who pays the fee set to acquire a license;
Who have documents showing that he is not a government employee.
Service Payment
Any paralegal may make the client to pay money equivalent to the service he renders.
He shall give a receipt for the payment of service given; the service fee shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Where the body to whom the application has been written requests for it to be written again, a paralegal shall write the application correctly without additional payment.
The paralegal shall pay tax for income earned.
Application Submitted to Acquire License
A person who wants to acquire a license to render service of paralegal shall fill and submit the form prepared for such purpose.
Renewal of License
Renewal of license shall be one at a year and it is excited from Hamle 1 up to Hamle 30 in Ethiopian calendar.
A paralegal who fails to renew his license with in the time limit stated under Sub-Article 1 of this Article may renew by paying a penality feeuntill Tikmit 30.
A paralegal who fails to renew his license with in the time limit stated under Sub-Article 2 of this Article due to force majeure may submit an application to the Zonal Justice Office for the renewal of his license.
Shall submit a document showing that he had paid tax for the renewal of his license; he shall also pay renewal fee.
Paralegals Existing on Work
Where a person have been working as a paralegals before the coming in to force of this Proclamation and fulfills the requirements stated under Article 60 of this Proclamation shall register and take a license within six months starting from the coming in to force of this Proclamation.
Severe and Simple Breachs
The following shall be severe disciplenary breachs:
 Writing an application or a contract without the request and opinion of the client;
 Writing legal application with consideration where free service formats are available;
 Working with acquaintanceship;
 Rendering service with a suspended license;
 Working without a renewed license;
 Disappearing from his permanent address or hiding evidence and documents of a client;
 Disclosing client's secret;
 Masquerading and presenting oneself as an advocate;
 Giving false or fraudulent explanation regarding himself or the service he renders;
 Accused and convicted of simple deciplinary breaches two times or more;
 Acquiring paralegal license using false document or fraudulent explanation;
 Writing an application for two contending parties;
The Following shall be simple disciplinary breachs:
 Failing to renew a license;
 Using words that undermine human dignity in a legal application;
 Causing a client pay more than that what is compatable with the service he rendered.
Retaining The Suspension of License
Where a paralegal found violating the provisions of Article 65 of this Proclamation, the Zonal Justice Office may suspend his license for two months until the case is examined.
Conditions in Which Client Lodged Accusation
A person who is harmed by paralegal may lodge his complaint in writting or orally to the Zonal or Woreda Justice Office.
The application lodged shall include the evidence or state the place where the evidence is found.
The Wereda Justice Office shall transfer the application to the Zonal Justice Office.
The Disciplinary Commission of Paralegal shall examine the complaint lodged and take necessary measures including revocation of a license.
Penalty
One of the following measures may be taken against a paralegal who has committed disciplinary breach:
 Oral warning;
 Written warning;
 a fine of 200 up to 1000 Birr;
 a fine of more than 1000 up to 3000 Birr;
 Suspension of license from three months up to one year; or
 Revocation of license.
The penalty described under Sub-Article 1 (a) - (c) of this Article shall be categorized as simple disciplinary measures.
The penalty described under Sub- Article 1(d) - (f) of this Article shall be categorized as severe disciplinary measures.
A paralegal who has been punished with disciplinary breach shall not be free from criminal liability.
A system in which disciplinary measure is taken shall be decided by Regulation to be issued.
Period of Limitation
Compliant regarding severe disciplinary breach against a paralegal shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within two years starting from the day it has been committed.
Compliant regarding simple disciplinary breach against a paralegal shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within one year starting from the day it has been committed.
Retaining Time of Penalty Record
Penalty of severe disciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against paralegal after a lapse of two years starting from the day the decision has been passed.
Penalty of simple deciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against paralegal after a lapse of one year starting from the day the penalty decision has been passed.
Powers and Duties of the Bureau
Give or cause to be given training that builds the capacity of paralegals.
Follow up and control activities of paralegals.
Provide the necessary work procedure.
Examine and decide an appeal lodged by a paralegal or by a client harmed by paralegal. The decision given shall be final. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
PART EIGHT
Disciplinary Commission of Paralegals
Establishment
Disciplinary Commission of Paralegals here after called “Commission” shall be established at the level of Zonal Justice Office by this Proclamation.
Member of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following members:
 The head of Zonal Justice Office... Chairperson;
 One prosecutor from Authentication and Licensing Work Process... Secretary and member;
 One prosecutor assigned by the head of Zonal Justice Office ...Member;
 One Judge from High court ...Member;
 One paralegal elected from among those registered at Zonal Justice Office ... Member;
The term of office of a member shall be two years.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 2 of this Article, any member may be elected again.
Powers and Duties of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
Examine and decide on an accusation lodged against a paralegal for violating this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued based on this Proclamation;
Shall put every decision given in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article in the private file of the paralegal;
A paralegal who have been punished with disciplinary breach shall not be free from criminal liability.
Meeting Procedure
The Commission shall meet and decide on cases lodged to it as it found necessary.
It shall be a quorum where more than half of the members of the Commission are present.
Decision shall be passed by a majority vote; in case of a tie the decision supported by the chairperson shall be the decision of the Commission.
PART NINE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Penality
Any person:
Who renders or attempt to render professional advocacy service without having or renewing his advocacy license shall be punished by a fine of not less than 5,000 Birr and not more than 20,000 Birr or simple imprisonment not less than 6 month and not move than 2 years.
Who renders service or attempts to render service without obtaining or renewing a paralegal license shall be punished with fine not less than 2, 000 Birr and not more than 10,000 Birr or an imprisonment of not less than three months or not more than one year.
Advocacy License Issued Before this Proclamation
An advocate who acquired 1st and 2nd level license in accordance with proclamation No. 86/2004, and that who have acquired a license before the coming into effect of Proclamation No. 86/2004 and his license had been approved in accordance with the same Proclamation shall be made to take competency examination prepared by the Bureau within one year starting from the coming into effect of this Proclamation, and an advocacy license shall be given for those who passed the examination in accordance with this Proclamation.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 1 of this Article, it shall not include those who has no obligation to take an examination in accordance with this Proclamation and those granted advocates' license by taking an examination before.
Where an advocate fails to take the examination or has taken but failed in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the Bureau shall cancel his license.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 3 of this Article, where an advocate fails to take an examination due to force majeure requests, the Bureau may decide for him to take the examination with in six months starting from the date his problem has been resolved.
An advocate who failed the examination may take it again in accordance with the program of the Bureau.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directives
The Oromia Administrative Council may issue a Regulation for the implementation of this Proclamation.
The Bureau may issue Directives for the implementation of this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued.
Inapplicable Laws
Proclamation to determine License and Discipline of Advocate of Oromia Regional State No. 86/2004 is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any laws and customary practice contrary to this Proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered by this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come in to force as of its publication on Megeleta Oromia.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of Oromia National Regional State
Finfine, the 14th of July 2013
A Proclamation to Amend Proclamation for the Reorganization and Redefinition of the Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No.163/2011(As Amended), Proclamation No.194/2015.
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the proclamation for the Reorganization and Redefinition of the Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No.163/2011 (asamended), NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with the Revised Constitution of the Regional State, Proclamation No.46/2001 article 49(3) (a), the following is hereby proclaimed:
This proclamation may be cited as the “A Proclamation to Amend Proclamation for the Reorganization and Redefinition of the Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No.163/2011(As Amended), Proclamation No.194/2015"
Proclamation No 163/2011 is here by amended as follows:
Following Article 2(17), a new 18 sub article is added;
"Livestock'' means horn animal, sheep, Goat, Camel, Chicken, Horse, donkey, Mule, Fish, pig, bees, livestock production output and development and includes other Livestock which shall be designated by law as “Livestock” in the future.
Following article 12(17), new sub articles 18,19 and 20 shall be added, and the subsequent sub articles shall be read as being re- arranged by moving away from each other.
Livestock and Fish Resources Development Bureau; Labor and Social Affairs Bureau; Construction Bureau.
The term “Transport Agency” provided under article 12(27) is cancelled and replaced by article 12(30) ,and shall be read as ‘Transport Authority” and the subsequent sub articles shall be read as being rearranged by moving away from each other.
Following article 12(30), a new sub article 12(31) is added.
Article 13(1) (a) is deleted and replaced by the following
 Bureaus specified under article 12(1-20).
Following article 13(1) (c), a new article 13(1) (d) and (e) is added;
 Transport Authority 13(1)(e) Coffee and Tea Development Authority.
Following article 31, new articles 32, 33 and 34 are added, and the other subsequent articles shall be read as being rearranged by moving away from each other.
Livestock and Fish Resources Development Bureau The bureau shall have the following powers and duties to:
Provide Livestock development extension service to the farmers and pastoralists; facilitate the ways of supplying production enhancing inputs and loans.
Improve, protect and supervise the livestock species of the region,
Develop, support and protect the fish resources using the natural and man-made water Resources;
Undertake a livestock forage development, work for the improvement and protection of the enclosed grazing lands.
Cause a research to be conducted to find water in areas where there is scarcity of water resources for the Livestock; develop with the Concerned body.
Promote or extend Live-stock development technologies developed in the country or imported from abroad,adopted and proved to be productive; supervise their implementation; and work with the concerned bodies to study and identify the needs and problems related with the Livestock development prevailing in the society.
Extend, support, follow up and monitor the activities related to development and health of livestock in the region;
Carry out investigation or inspection activities with the concerned bodies regarding communicable diseases of livestock which may be transmitted from country to country and from region to region; prevent or controls the livestock’s mobility; dispose the contaminated livestock where deemed necessary.
Undertake examination on meat production so as to enable the delivery of quality meat to the society from the slaughter houses; control the illegal slaughtering in collaboration with the concerned body.
Set criteria of slaughter houses of the region; provide competency license; renew and cancel same when necessary.
Control the livestock mobility so as to overcome the transmission of communicable diseases and destruction of the livestock's species; work the direction of livestock mobility to be legally recognized; establish, organize, follow up and supervise quarantine and examination centers;
Ensure and supervise the protection of animal welfare.
Control illegal trade of different kinds of fertilizers, medicines and external antiparasites of livestock; take legal measures in collaboration with concerned body; cause the expired ones to be disposed;
Work for production of livestock and livestock’s products for the internal and external markets in quality and quantity required by market; implement the quality and efficiency standard set out; give, renew, cancel and control the quality and efficiency assurance certificate;
Provide professional support to producers, suppliers and consumers of livestock and livestock's product; follow up and control quality and efficiency of the product; 
Work, supports, follow up and supervise the implementation of the bees resource development and bees resource product of honey and wax in a productive way;
Support and follow up private investors engaged in the development and health protection of livestock in the region; control the efficiency and quality of their activity;
Establish, organize,administer, and supervise the basic infrastructure and livestock health protection such as: technologies producing and multiplying livestock centers, laboratory center and livestock health protection clinics.
The bureau shall have the following powers and duties:-
Works to resolve the disputes between the employee and employer peacefully and to create industrial peace;
Encourages and support the employee and employer to exercise the right to organize in association and enables them use collective agreements;
Prepares and gives training to the concerned body to raise awareness on labor law; gives necessary support and advice.
Registers employee and employer association, follows up, gives professional support; gives authentication certificate; renews and cancels;
Registers the collective agreements; follow up their implementation; gives professional support.
Registers the employment contract made between the employee and employer
Establishes labor relations administration board where there are many organizations; assigns the necessary man-power; administers, follows up and supervises same.
Conducts work condition control in public and private enterprises; takes or causes corrective measures to be taken.
Conducts studies on employees work condition, health, security, profession and work environments; causes the outcome to be implemented.
Collects, organizes, analyzes industry data, gives feedback for organizations; presents a report to the con-cerned body;
Follows up the implementation of work condition standards; controls and takes corrective measures.
Conducts study regarding the human resource of the region; identifies, analyzes and organizes employed and unemployed human power; prepares data and statistics; gives same to the concerned body;
Collects and identifies information about the market demand of man power; profession, need and vacant positions; organizes and distributes data and information; brings the work and worker together;
Gives awareness work opportunities and working cultures for the job seekers interested to work in the region; gives advice, provides necessary support.
Give, renew, cancel license to private agencies interested to engage in activities of bringing the work and workers in the region; supervise and control same
Follows up, controls regardding those private agencies licensed by the federal government and working in the regional state and reports to the concerned body where they are found working illegally.
Resolves the dispute arise between the employee and the private agencies by bringing the two bodies together and negotiate; provides them professional support.
Gives awareness raising trainings for the society regarding the prevention of human trafficking; follows up, supervises or controls; takes or causes to be taken corrective measures.
Conducts studies on causes of illegal human trafficking; prepares preventive strategies depending on the findings of the studies; implements or causes to be implemented with concerned body;
Conducts studies on the social problems, prepares preventive strategies depending on the findings of the studies; implements and follows up its implementation.
Organizes, implements and disseminates social security data;
Trains social development workers; deploys, supervises and gives support.
Encourage civil societies and self help associations to be organized; give, renew, cancel licenses of those who organized; educates them to participate on social and development activities.
Gives awareness raising trainings for the society on the issues of the rights of persons with disabilities; prevention of anti- social life and elders treatment; evaluates its outcome;
Works for the protection of rights and interests of persons with disabilities; implement programs prepared and laws issued regarding this matter; give support;
Works with a view to protect family welfare, gives professional support to strengthen the culture of supporting within the family; not to be exposed to social problems; facilitates means for the poor to get support.
Facilitates conditions in collaboration with concerned body for the disabled persons to get orthopedic serviced training and special need education; gives professional support.
Facilitates conditions for elders and persons with disabilities who want to participate on developmental activities in organized form to get professional support;
Facilitates conditions for the elders and disabled persons who have no support to get rehabilitative services in the community; provides professional assistances, arranges, rehabilitate that unable to get support in the society; administers the rehabilitation centers, follows up; assigns the necessary man power, supervises, gives support;
Facilitates conditions for the elders to have recreational centers; coordinates their indigenous knowledge and makes it pass to the next generation;
Provides rehabilitative services for those who are exposed to social problems; facilitates conditions to reunify them with their families or to the community and improves their lives;
Cause the establishment of social fund; collects resources used for social security; implements it up on approval, supervises, follows up, gives professional support.
Encourages non-governmental organizations to engage in social security affairs; coordinates, gives support, evaluates their work performance with the concerned body;
Controls whether foreign citizens who are engage in different activities in the region to have licenses; take or cause to be taken corrective measures on those who are engage in different activities without licenses, works with concerned body for measures to be taken;
Sets out an effective evidence collection and implementation system that make performance of the social protection program speedy and successful.
Examine and facilitate conditions for resolving various questions in relation withthe change or addition of construction activities, the price fluctuations, disputes relating on the construction projects,
Follow up, make parents for the projects of building constructions, roads, water, irrigation and other similar projects led by government; cause payment to be performed, evaluate its implementation; investigate the problem and deliver commendable view for the government.
Investigate the need of regional state construction and designs works; cause to be implemented.
Without prejudice to the power vested in the concerned body, set standards of construction activities; approve their implementation in accordance with the law.
Supervise the activities of construction branch; follow up its implementation; work with concerned body;
Undertake control regarding bid standard of construction and transfer of building, water, irrigation, road and etc constructions, ; take corrective measures;
Prepare various standards and cause to be implemented to make the building constructions be performed using local materials so as to minimize construction costs;
Evaluate request to become contractors and advisors and issue license for the contractors and advisors who intend to engage in construction works; renew, upgrade, register, cancel where it is used unlawfully and un ethically; notify sectors by classifying them based on their performance;
Decide the levels of advisors; investigate the performance reports of advisors; approve the payments of their services;
Examine the designs performed by the advisors or other bodies; approve, perform supervise and follow up of construction activities; approve payments;
Perform development activities and control of the activities of construction industry.
Perform investigation activities of the city's plan depending on the laws of building; evaluate the designs; provide construction and utilization licenses;
Organize building council office; manage; supervise; undertake research on the construction imputes; coordinate the higher learning institutions to participate on such research;
Encourage and provide necessary support for micro and small scale associations engaged in consultancy and construction activities in the region so as to enable them improve their abilities and be competent in the market;
Encourage the expansion of manually performed job opportunities in the construction activities;
Causes the transportation service system of the Region to be implemented in cooperated and organized manner;
Issues, renews and cancels license for investors who engaged in public and freight transport service; organizes them in association; gives, renews and cancels license of the association; support and supervise same;
Conducts Study on technologies used for transport service; sets out standards, evaluate and cause same to be implemented properly;
Facilitates condition to cooperate, expand and strength the transport service among regional states.
Registers motorized and non-motorized cars and those are pulled by animal power and also boats in the Region; gives and controls ownership certificate;
Approves the effectiveness of drivers, captains, cars and boats; may delegate and control other certified agency or organization those can examine competency of vehicle where deemed necessary;
Performs car price estimation service and changing the name of owner of the car; register and keep car purchasing and selling contract, car renting contract and cars kept as guarantee;
Sets out the managing system of transport service; facilitate condition; causes and follow up the competition tariff deployment system to be implemented; study and decide the transport tariff from departure to destination and follow its implementation;
Perform traffic movement control works on road transport; follows its implementation; organize the traffic security control in the Region; supervises; conducts study  concerning traffic accident; works with concerned body;
Facilitates condition for  raising funds for the traffic security movement and transport related work from the region and different organs; causes the funds to be properly implemented for the objective needed;
Causes the existence of adequate transport and deployment coverage in the region; study and ensure the deployment program of association and private engaged in public and freight transport; improve; follows up its implementation; takes correction measures where there is shortage;
Ensures efficiency of trans port operators; give license; register contact made between operators; take corrective measures.
Gives, renews, controls and cancels competency certificate for associations who produce, repair and renew transport service materials; and for associations engaged in car washing and providing training of driving profession training;
Prepares training criteria for organizations that give training of driving profession; follows its implementation; take corrective measure where there is limitation;
Gives competency examination for trainees who are graduated from driving training institute; gives driving license for those who passed the examination; renews; controls; cancel the same;
Constructs bus and boat station, freight terminal, parking, training and examination center with concerned body; cause to be constructed; supervise and control their service delivery; collect internal income from administration of the station; implement same properly;
Gives professional support regarding purchase of government and Public organization car;
Gives deployment for transport association or organization on necessary place and direction when there is emergency case; its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Gives license for organizations which examine competency of vehicles; renews; controls and cancels same.
Constantly collects and organizes any statistical data and other information related to the transport of the region;
Conducts research to modernize and expand transport of the region; cause to be conducted; causes theresult of the research to be implemented when approved;
Works with concerned body to minimize smoke, gas; evaporation and other environmental pollutant things emitted from cars, boat and other transport service related objects;
Extend a system which make the cars and boat shall be repaired; cause to be implemented
Give, renew and cancel Coffee, tea, scents and spices trade license for individual traders and organization engaged in coffee, tea, scents and spices trading based on the competency level set out; transfer the list to the trade and market development of the region;
Give extension development and quality approval service of coffee, tea, scents and spices to farmers and investors; cause to be expanded new technology and good experiences; follow its productivity;
Follow up, supervise and give technical support to make coffee, tea, scents and spices production modern and be prepared to the market in plenty and quality;
Set out system of controlling quality production of coffee, tea, scents and spices, follow up and its implementation; control the movement of illegal trade in cooperation with concerned body; take or cause to be taken corrective measures;
Facilitate system for coffee, tea, scents and spices producers and suppliers to get up dated and cost wise balanced materials required for preparation and control of high quality of the products;
Undertake research that enables strength and solve the chronic problem for development and market of coffee, tea, scents and spices;set out technical implementation of the research findings; implement with con-cerned body;
Cause to strengthen market center of first level coffee; construct where necessary;follow up its performance;
Implement the directive issued on quality group level, conservation and supply of exported coffee, control its performance.
Prepare meetings that strength development and market of coffee, tea, scents and spices with concerned body; participate in the prepared;
Conduct and cause to be conducted study and research on coffee, tea, scents and spices development; with concerned body;
Work with higher educational institution so as to obtain efficient man power.
The Powers and duties vested in Livestock Resource Development and Health Agency by Livestock and Fishery Resource Development, preservation and utilization of Oromia Regional State proclamation No. 178/2013 shall be implemented by Livestock and Fishery Resource Development Bureau established by this proclamation.
The powers and duties of supervision and monitoring of the construction works and designing activities as well as organizing building council vested in Industry and Urban Development Bureau by Oromia Re-gion building proclamationNo.174/2011, shall implemented by Construction Bureau established by this proclamation.
The Powers and duties given to Agricultural Bureau under proclamation to Decide the Procedure of Coffee Quality control and Coffee trade in Oromia Region No.160/2009 shall be implemented by Coffee and Tea Development Authority established by this proclamation.
WHERAS, it has deemed necessary to redefine the powers and duties of Oromia Roads Authority stated in the Proclamation enacted to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No 163/2011 with a view to establish a system by which the region’s road is to be constructed, preserved, maintained and its standard is improved;
NOWTHEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3)(a) of the Revised Constitution No. 46/2001 of the Oromia National Regional State, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This proclamation may be cited as “Proclamation No. 185/2014,  A Proclamation to Provide for the Amendment of a Proclamation Enacted to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No.163/2011”
The following three new Sub articles 2(18), 2(19) and 2(20) are added following Article 2(17) of Proclamation No 163/2011 under definition part.
“Authority” shall mean the Oromia Roads Authority.
“Road” shall mean a road that its standard and level of services is determined by Federal Road Authority or the Oromia Roads Authority.
“Community Road” shall mean a road which is constructed or maintained, by the participation of the community, finance or capacity of Woreda Administration or aid constructed or maintained at its level.
Article 38 of Proclamation No 163/2011 shall be repealed and replaced by the following.
Initiate and study policy, strategies, programs and laws that help to expand roads, submit to the government, implement upon approval; cause to be implemented;
Administer, supervise, preserve, maintain, cause to be maintained and improve the standards of the roads of the region;
Prepare plan and programs that help to expand, maintain and improve the standards of the roads; 
Based on the demands and economic development of the region prepare and implement service level and design of the region’s road; cause to be implemented.
Cause the construction, maintenance, improvement of roads and bridges by contractors or the community as the case may be;
Undertake and cause to be undertaken the study and research relating to road and road related activities; gather different evidence and statistics, organize, disseminate, submit a report;
Establish a mechanism by which road and bridge is studied, road design is prepared, as well as construction and maintenance of road is undertaken, implement and follow its implementation;
Conduct study continuously regarding technologies that help to expand, maintain, and develop road standard by low cost and implement;
Cause the community to bring together their human and material resource to construct, maintain and preserve community and other roads, deliver technical and construction materials support;
Supervise and cause to be supervised the quality of road construction and maintenance;
Follow up the implementation laws relating to road with a view to protect roads from destruction and out of service;
Work in collaboration with concerned bodies to build the capacity of associations, micro and small enterprises, small scale contractors organized to construct and maintain roads;
Determine and supervise the width of the road and its utilization;
Determine the utilization par- ticularly, the axial load and size;
Study and cause to be studied the standard and quality of road construction materials such as stone, pavement soil, selected soil and other materials, cause the utilization of those which fulfill the required standard and quality;
Utilize road construction materials such stone, pavement soil, selected soil and other materials with authorization of concerned bodies without payment;
Supervise the utilization of unlawful utilization of roads with a view to make the utilization of roads for intended purpose, take and cause to be taken corrective measures;
Remove and cause to be removed the properties found on the road in collaboration with concerned body;
Provide sufficient protection for natural resource and environment while constructing roads;
Pay and cause compensation to be paid for the land property expropriated for the construction road;
Work to strengthen the implementation capacity of road sector, deliver and cause to be delivered short trainings.
Without prejudice to the power and duties of the heads of the executive organs of the region given under Article 49 of the Proclamation No 163/2003, the General Manager of the Authority shall have the following additional Power and duties:
Undertake study regarding the salary scale of employees to be treated differently; submit to the Regional Administrative Council; implement same upon approval;
Without prejudice to the adjudication of the case through court procedures, cause the settlement of disputes between the Authority and contractors, associations, micro and small scale enterprises and consultants related with construction of roads to be handled based on the consent of the Authority and parties contracted with the Authority out of court; the particulars shall be determined by regulation issued.
Works undertaken prior to the issuance of this Proclamation shall be deemed as if they were started by this proclamation and their implementation shall continue.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter in to force as of its publication on Megeleta Oromia.	
Whereas, the superpower of the Regional State ‘Caffee’ lead by speaker and different bodies organized under ‘Caffee’ in accordance to the Revised Constitution of the Regional State of 2001 are expected to carry out powers granted to them according to the Constitution and other laws in the direction that be acquainted with representation of the people;
Whereas, it has become necessary that the secretariat of ‘Caffee’ having legal personality, its organizational structure and power shall be able in the position to provide services and professional support for ‘Caffee’ and ‘Caffee’ Organs based on growth, organizational changes and procedures existing now and expected for the future;
Whereas, the secretariat based on the organizational structure and power granted to it by the law is obliged to render strong, quality, efficient and effective services and professional support in the activities of law making, over sighting and representation carried out by ‘Caffee’ and ‘Caffee’ organs following parliamentary organization and procedures;
Now, therefore, in accordance to the Revised Constitution of Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No. 46/2001 article 49 sub article 3 it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This proclamation may be cited as, “The Proclamation to Provide for Reestablishment of Secretariat of ‘Caffee’, Proclamation No. 191/2015”.
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Speaker” means the speaker of Oromia National Regional State “Caffee”.
“Caffee” means the Oromia National Regional State legislative organ and supreme political power established in accordance to article 46 sub article 1 of the Revised Constitution.
“Constitution” means the Revised Constitution of Oromia National Regional State.
“Government” means Oromia National Regional Government.
“Region” means the Oromia Region.
“Caffee Organs” means the assembly of the ‘Caffee’, the Secretariat, the Coordinating Committee, the Standing Committees and Whips of political parties having seat in the ‘Caffee’, the ‘Caffee’ affairs Advisory Committee and the ‘Caffee’ group organized in accordance to laws of organization and procedures of the ‘Caffee’.
“State Organs” means the legislative/ ‘Caffee’, the executive and the judiciary organ of the Oromia National RegionalState.
“Law” means proclamation, regulations and directives enacted by ‘Caffee’ and bodies delegated to do so.
“Secretariat” means the ‘Caffee’ secretariat reestablished by this proclamation having legal personality.
Provisions of this proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall apply to the feminine.
The Secretariat of ‘Caffee’ (herein after referred to as “the Secretariat”) is hereby reestablished by this proclamation having legal personality.
The Secretariat shall be accountable to the Speaker.
The Secretariat of the ‘Caffee’ shall have the following organizational structure.
Head of the secretariat; Advisors and appointees assigned by the speaker as it may be necessary; and Necessary employees and professionals.
The secretariat may have its own salary scale to be determined by the ‘Caffee’.
The secretariat shall have the following power and duties: Render administrative services to the ‘Caffee’, organs of the ‘Caffee’ and other internal structures.
Provide professional support for the activities of law making, over sighting and people’s representation carried out by the ‘Caffee’ and the ‘Caffee’ organs.
Arrange and facilitate meeting halls for the ‘Caffee’ and the ‘Caffee’ organs.
Register and keep properly the minutes, decisions and different documents of the ‘Caffee’ and the ‘Caffee’ organs.
Provide library, information, study and research services for the ‘Caffee’ organs and members.
Publish laws enacted by the ‘Caffee’ and other organs delegated to do so on the Megeleta Oromia; implement and make to be implemented the publishing and distribution of laws, bulletins and different periodicals.
Prepare and carry out strategy that strengthen the capacity of the ‘Caffee’ and peoples’ Councils exist at all levels.
Convey agendas and documents for the ‘Caffee’ members in accordance to the time of reading specified by the ‘Caffee’ procedural laws.
Provide necessary cordial reception services for the guests and organs of the ‘Caffee’.
Own property; enter into contracts; sue and be sued in its own name.
Based on law, implement other activities that enhance roles of the ‘Caffee’, the ‘Caffee’ organs and the ‘Caffee’ members.
Under the recommendation of the speaker, the assignment of the head of the secretariat shall be approved by the ‘Caffee’.
Subject to the directives from the speaker, carry out power and duties of the secretariat.
Notwithstanding to carrying out the power and duties of the secretariat, he shall have the following power and duties:
Prepare yearly work plan and budget to be presented by the speaker for the approval of the ‘Caffee’ and implement the same.
Based on delegation given by the speaker, pay out and put for the activities planned the budget approved by the ‘Caffee’.
Prepare and present activities and budget implementation report to the speaker and the ‘Caffee’.
Administer property of the secretariat according to the property administration law of the regional  government.
Delegate partially his power and duties to others.
Carry out other activities given by the speaker.
Source of budget of the secretariat shall be: Budget approved by the ‘Caffee’; Grants and support gained from different organs and legitimate sources.
The secretariat shall have complete and accurate financial books of accounts.
Books of accounts and financial documents of the Secretariat shall be audited by the Auditor General of the Oromia National Regional State yearly.
Notwithstanding the provision under sub article 2 of this article, the speaker of the ‘Caffee’ any time it deems necessary, can order audit of the account and financial documents.
The Proclamation to Provide for Establishment of Secretariat of ‘Caffee’, Proclamation No. 47/2001 is repealed.
Any laws and customary practices that inconsistent with this proclamation shall have no effect with respect to matters included herein.
Effective Date of the Proclamation This proclamation shall come into effect as of on the publication date on the ‘Megeleta Oromia.’
Whereas, it has been deemed necessary to reestablish Megeleta Oromia News Paper;
Now, therefore, in accordance to the Constitution of the Oromia National Regional State Proclamation Number 46/1993 Article 49(3) (a), it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This proclamation may be cited as, “Reestablishment Proclamation of the Megeleta Oromia News Paper, Number 186/ 2014”.
Legal News Paper known as, “Megeleta Oromia” and published under the control of ‘Caffee’ Oromia is hereby reestablished by this proclamation.
Proclamation, Regulations enacted, agreement entered by the Regional Government of Oromia and ratified by ‘Caffee’ and any law of the Region shall be published on Megeleta Oromia.
The Legislative, Executive and Judiciary body of Government and any natural or legal person shall have obligation to execute laws published on the Megeleta Oromia.
Megeleta Oromia shall be published with Afan Oromo, Amharic and English languages. Where difference in content arises between the three languages, version of Afan Oromo shall prevail.
Caffee’ Oromia shall organize publishing work of the Megeleta Oromia; And made facilitation to be published in Afan Oromo, Amharic and English languages.
The Proclamation establishing Megeleta Oromia Number 1/1993 is hereby repealed by this Proclamation.
This Proclamation shall enter into force as of 27 th day of March 2014.
A Proclamation to Establish Oromia National Regional State Urban Land Development and Management Agency.
A Proclamation to Establish Oromia National Regional State Urban Land Development and Management Agency
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to implement programs stated in the urban land development and management policy in an organized manner;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to make free this limited resources from misuse and rent-seeking through the realization of urban land development and management system within the urban areas of the region in a way that has transparency and accountability and to realize social and economic transformation;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to strengthen implementation capacity of urban by creating information and data system of urbanland by creating modern procedure and  technology as well as building skilled and competent manpower;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to establish an organ that work on urban land development and management issues which has been executed at different place in a scattered manner;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3) (a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This Proclamation may be cited as “A Proclamation to Establish Urban Land Development and Management Agency No. 179/2013.”
Unless the context required otherwise in this Proclamation:-
“Bureau” means Oromia Industry and Urban Development Bureau.
“Urban” means urban whose population is 2000 and more and where the livelihood of 50% of this popultion does not depend up on agriculture.
“Urban Land” means land found in the boundary of urban administration.
“Urban Land Management” means administering and leading urban land and land related property in a modern way.
“Urban Administration” means urban administration that acquired legal and concerned government organ recognition.
“Land Related Property” means urban land and immovable property found on it.
“Cadastre” means a system by which land and real propertiy found on it is registred and known.
“Urban Plan” means structural plan, local development plan or basic plan of an urban center including annexed descriptive documents which are legally endorsed by the authorized body and have legally binding effect.
“Person” means physical or judicial person or organization.
Provisions of this proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall apply to the feminine gender.
To enhance transparency and accountability in urban land use that is guided by urban plan to bring basic change in socio-economic of urban society as well as, fast growth and development of towns by creating organized urban land development and management system.
Oromia National Regional State Land Development and Mamanagement Agency hereafter called “Agency” shall be established by this Proclamation.
The Agency shall be accountable to the Bureau.
The head office of the Agency shall be in Finfine Town and it may have structure and office at Zonal, Urban, and Kebele level as it may necessary.
The Agency shall have the following organization. 1)	General Manager, 2)	Deputy General Manager and 3)	Other necessary workers.
The Agency shall have the following powers and duties:- 
Implement urban land development and management policy and strategy, cause to be implemented, follow up, and control.
Provide modern urban land development and administration system; cause to be provided; support; control and follow up.
Execute request of change of ownership and type of investment land project with the concerned body; follow up its implementation.
Cause compensation to be estimated in accordance with the law for persons whose land is expropriated; cause compensation to be paid before their displacement.
Undertake research to make compensation payment correspond with the market value of the time; submit it to the concerned body and cause to be approved, implement and cause to be implemented with the concerned body.
Work in coordination with the concerned body to rehabilitate persons whose land is expropriated; support; follow up and control.
Provide a system in which urban identify, register rural land and utilize it for development and avoid illegal activities.
Provide a system which makes urban land delivery fruitful and urban economic development aim to be achieved.
Provide land preparation system and organize land data bank.
Shall give construction and land utilization license; follow up its implementation; where a problem is found take and cause legal measure to be taken with the concerned body.
Give and cause to be given a training that strengthen worker's implementation capacity.
Shall provide urban land utilization plan that ensures the realization of urban development goal, that could be implemented and as well as correspond with each other.
Issue Directives and guideline to ensure urban land use for maximum economical benefit in accordance with urban plan, cause its implement ation; follow up and control its implementation.
Issue Directive and guideline with the concerned body to control the expansion of illegal construction inside urban areas and on the borders; follow up, control its implimentation; take and cause legal measure to be taken.
Coordinate the collection and organization of data regarding land and property related to land in urban areas as per cadastral map system; control; cause its implementation.
Follow up, control cities whether they follow the master plan in a modern way; give the necessary support in the preparation of the town's master plan as per the standard.
Study and submit structure and salary of the employees of the agency to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council and implement the same upon approval.
Study and submit urbans that did not enter in to the lease system to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval and impliment the same upon approval; follow up its implementation.
Study and Submit initial lease price of urban land to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval; cause to be implemented; support.
Coordinate, control those organs ac- countabile to it.
Own property, enter in to contract; sue and to be sued.
General Manager of the Agency shall be nominated by the President of the National Regional State of Oromia and appointed by National Regional State's Administrative Council.
Powers and duties of the General Manager The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties.
Coordinate and administer duties of the Agency.
Implement the powers and duties of the Agency; cause to be implement.
May delegate some of his powers and duties to heads and other worker under him for better implementation.
Employ, administer and fire workers in accvordance with civil servant law.
Represent the Agency in all communications with the third party.
Prepare and submit work plan and budget to the concerned body and implement the same upon approval.
Administer, open bank account and run the budget of the Agency, as per financial law.
Prepare and submit work performance and budget execution report to the concerned body.
Represent the General Manager in his absence.
Perform duties given to him by the General Manager.
Income of the Agency shall be from the budget allocated by the government and various donations.
The Agency shall have full and clear book of account and financial documents.
Books of account and financial document of the Agency shall be audited by Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Office or by other auditor assigned by it.
All works and datas related with urban land started by various bodies shall be transferred to the Agency by this Proclamation.
The Oromia Urban Planning Institute and Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office shall be accountable to the Agency.
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may establish different bodies by Regulation to ensure the proper implementation of the powers and duties of the Agency.
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may issue Regulation to implement this Proclamation.
The Agency may issue Directives to implement this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Article 13 Sub-Article (2)(f) of Proclamation No. 163/2011 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Articles 4 (6), (7), (9), (10) and (28) of Proclamation No. 170/2012 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office Regulation No. 142/2012 Article 4 Sub-Article 2, Article 7 Sub-Article 1, Article 8 Sub-Article 11  nd Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 Sub Articles 5 and 7 and Article 16 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistant with this Proclamation shall not be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
This Proclamation shall come in to effect as of the 13th of July 2013.
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to expand irrigation development to secure food self sufficiency and increase production and productivity to supply raw materials for industries without being dependent on erratic and uneven rainfall distribution;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to bring together different irrigation development activities which were under taken and followed by different bodies, which weakened the development activity and bring together the scattered resource to one place and use it;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to establish an independent governmental organ to expand irrigation development in a sustainable manner without affecting the environment;
NOW THERFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3(a) of Proclama- tion No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
This proclamation may be cited as “Irrigation Development Authority Establishment Proclamation No. 180/2013’’.
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Scheme Adminstration’’ means to manage, follow up, care, and adminster different irrigation scale which their construction is completed to make them able to give sustainable irrigation supply.
“Irrigation Scheme’’ means an irrigation field having tradtional and modern irrigation infrastructure and development found at a defined place.
“Users’’ any person, private assocation or organization or that uses irrigation developemnt scheme.
“Tradtional Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using tradtional method, skill and local material.
“Modern Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using irrigation infrastructures constructed in modern way having modern technology.
“Jallisii Bonne/Moisture Irrigation/’’ means developing irrigation farming using soil moisture.
“Micro Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of less than 2.5 hectares.
“Small Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of 2.5 - 200 hectares. 
“Medium Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation which undertaken on an area of above 200 to 3000 hectares.
The Authority shall have: 1) General Manager, 2)  Deputy General Manager and 3) Required staffs;
Evaluate, the outcome and problems of irrigation development and drainage works undertaken at any level.
Works with the concerned bodies to supply different irrigation farming development inputs that assists in increasing production and productivity.
Facilitate conditions with the concerned body for irrigation development users to get credit service; and follow up.
Works with concerned bodies to control migratory and regular pests which can affect irrigation crop product.
Works with concerned body on conservation and watershade development related with irrigation development areas based on the regional watershade development  guideline.
Impliment irrigation development related laws in the region.
Use water without permission for small scale irrigation development for the benefit of the community.
Facilitate conditions for farmers and pastoralists to produce market oriented products and work with the concerned body for them to get market for their products.
Work with the concerned body to cause payment of compensation to those affected by construction of irrigation development in accordance with the law.
Give capacity building training to upgrade the execution capacity of experts and users of irrigation development; provide the required material for the employees; facilitate conditions and follow up its outcome.
Own property, enter into contract, sue and be sued.
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties;
The General Manager executes the power and duties given to the Authority;
Plan, organize, coordinate, direct, administer and control the activities of the Authority;
Employ, administer and fire employees in accordance with the civil  service law of the region;
Represent the Authority in all itsdealings with third parties;
Prepare and submit plan and annual budget to the government and implement the same upon approval;
Administer the budget, open and operate bank accounts of the Authority
Prepare and submit financial and performance report of the Authority to the regional government;
Where found necessary for the effective performance of his activities, may delegate part of his powers and duties to the officials that are accountable to him.
Where in the absence of the General Manager acts on behalf of him;
Execute works given by the General Manager.
The source of income for the Authority is the allocated budget by the government, financial assistance and fees paid for different services.
The Authority shall keep complete book of account and financial documents.
The books of account and property of the Authority shall be audited by the Auditor General of Oromia or by an auditor represented by it.
Rights and obligation related to irrigation development which was given to Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bu reau is transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation;
Works related to irrigation development which were constructed and those that are under construction by Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Works related to irrigation scheme administration activities which were undertaken by Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise, assets, data and materials for this work are transferred  to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Assets, data and materials which were used for irrigation development activities at Oromia Agricultural Bureau and Oromia Water Mine and Energy are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Article 17 Sub-Article 13, 20, 21, 22 and 23 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs Proclamation are repealed by this Proclamation;
Article 24 Sub-Article 2, 3 and 4 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs are repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Article 2(b) of Regulation No. 58/2005 issued to amend Regulation No. 14/1999, Regulation to Provide the Amendment of Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise Establishment is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistent  with matters provided for under this Proclamation shall be inapplicable.
This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 13th of July 2013. 
Proclamation No. 180/2013 A Proclamation to Establish Irrigation Development Authority of Oromia National Regional State
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to expand irrigation development to secure food self sufficiency and increase production and productivity to supply raw materials for industries without being dependent on erratic and uneven rainfall distribution;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to bring together different irrigation development activities which were under taken and followed by different bodies, which weakened the development activity and bring together the scattered resource to one place and use it;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to establish an independent governmental organ to expand irrigation development in a sustainable manner without affecting the environment;
NOW THERFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3(a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This proclamation may be cited as “Irrigation Development Authority Establishment Proclamation No. 180/2013’’.
Definition
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Scheme Adminstration’’ means to manage, follow up, care, and adminster different irrigation scale which their construction is completed to make them able to give sustainable irrigation supply.
“Irrigation Scheme’’ means an irrigation field having tradtional and modern irrigation infrastructure anddevelopment found at a defined place.
“Users’’ any person, private assocation or organization or that uses irrigation developemnt scheme.
“Tradtional Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using tradtional method, skill and local material.
“Modern Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using irrigation infrastructures constructed in modern way having modern technology.
“Jallisii Bonne/Moisture Irrigation/’’ means developing irrigation farming using soil moisture.
“Micro Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of less than 2.5 hectares.
“Small Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of 2.5 - 200 hectares.
“Medium Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation which undertaken on an area of above 200 to 3000 hectares.
“Large Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of more than 3000 hectares.
“Irrigation Development’’ means to develop an irrigation farming using different technologies with ground or surface water or both.
“Irrigation Farming’’ means farming conducted using irrigation water.
“Drainage’’ means to drain excess water from farm land which is more than the need of the crop.
“Technology’’ means all the infrastructures and inputs required for the development of irrigation.
Gender Reference Provisions of this Proclamation set out in a masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Establishment and Accountability
Oromia Irrigation Development Authority, here after referred as “The Authority’’ is hereby established by this Proclamation.
The Authority shall be accountable to the President of the National Regional State of Oromia.
Objective
Support by irrigation development, to hasten socio economic growth of the farmers and pastoralist community of the region, to alleviate shortage of food crops and for the people of the region to attain food selfsufficiency in sustainable manner.
Office of The Authority
The head office of the Authority shall be in Finfinne and may have offices at Zone, District and Keble level as necessary.
PART TWO
Organization, Powers and Duties of the Authority
Organization of The Authority
The Authority shall have:
General Manager,
Deputy General Manager and
Required staffs;
CONTENT
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public Enterprises
Proclamation .................................................. Page1
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public
Enterprises Proclamation
WHEREAS, it is found necessary for the government to put an effort to bridge the market gap through capacity building by enhancing the role of the private sector in accelerating economic development for sustainability of the economic development;
WHEREAS, public enterprises have to continue under state ownership, it is necessary to provide them with such guidance so as to enable them to improve their effectiveness, to be competitive and profitable and thereby play appropriate role in the implementation of the economic development
WHEREAS, it becomes necessary to establish clear and legal procedures that public enterprises follow in the free market economy, to participate in the stabilization of the market for public benefit and/or efficiently implementation of the mission given to them;
WHEREAS, to enable the Regulatory Authority, in leading and supporting public enterprises to fulfill their objectives efficiently, it is necessary to establish conducive environment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3 (a) of Proclamation No. 46/1994 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia,it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
CHAPTER ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Public Enterprise Proclamation No. 181/2013”.
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Authority” means Oromia Government Public Enterprise Regulatory Authority.
“Board” means the management board of government public enterprise.
“Net Profit” means any excess of all revenue and receipts over costs, salary and operating expenses properly attributable to the operations of the financial year including depreciation, interest and taxes.
“Public Enterprise” means a wholly or partially state owned public enterprise established by the government to carry on manufacturing, distribution, construction service rendering or other economic development and related activities.
“Initial Capital” means total assets assigned to the enterprise by the government at the time of its establishment and later.
“Regional Administrative Council” means supreme excutive organ of the National Regional Government.
“Government” means the National Regional Government of Oromia.
“Auditor” means a natural or juridical person who is enpowered to audit the accounts of public enterprise.
“State Dividend” means the remaining balance after deduction of legal reserve and other reserve from he net profit.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this proclamation set out in masculine gender shall also apply to feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall be applicable on any existing public enterprise and on those established after the issuance of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER TWO
Establishment and Legal Personality of Public Enterprise
Requirements to be Met Before Establishment of an Enterprise
Before the establishment of an enterprise the Authority shall ascertain that:
 The payment which is made in kind is valued properly by an expert
 Cash paid as part of the initial capital is deposited in a bank and in the account of the enterprise.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article if the payment made in kind has audited accounts the book value of each payment in kind may be taken into account.
The experts stated under Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article shall prepare a report containing a detailed description of the property, the value given to each item and the method of valuation
Where any expenses incurred by the Authority for the establishment of an enterprise is confirmed by the auditors, it shall form part of the capital.
The sums deposited under Sub-Article 1(b) of this Article shall not be withdrawn from the bank until the establishment of the enterprise.
Establishment of the Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall be established by this Proclamation and the establishment law shall contain:
The name of the enterprise,
The objectives of the enterprise,
A statement that the enterprise shall be governed by this proclamation,
The authorized capital,
The amount of the initial capital paid up both in kind and in cash,
The address of the head office of the enterprise,
That it may have branches,
The duration for which the enterprise is established.
Working Procedure, Legal Personality and Liability of Public Enterprise
A public enterprise shall have legal personality.
A public enterprise may not be held liable beyond its total assets;
An enterprise shall follow the laws and systems of free market.
Without prejudice to the provision of Sub-Article 3 of this Article where found necessary the government may order the enterprises directly to intervene for the benefit of the public.
Address
The address of an enterprise shall be the place where its head office is situated and may have branch offices as may be necessary.
CHAPTER THREE
Organization and Management of an Enterprise
Organization
Any public development enterprise shall have the following organisation:
Board,
A General Manager and a Deputy General Manager as may be necessary;
The necessary staff.
Powers and Duties of the Authority
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Authority given by other laws, the Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Cause public enterprises to submit a plan and performance report; analyze; follow up; evaluate its performance and give feedback.
Propose the chairperson and members of the Board of public enterprises for appointment and assignment to the President of the Regional Government.
Fix allowance to be paid to the members of the Board, follow up its implementation.
Decide the standard of public enterprise based upon their capital and manner of establishment.
Cause the allocation of initial capital of the enterprises by the government.
Cause the allocation of reserve fund or funds by the Government so that the authorized capital of a newly established public enterprise to be fully paid up within five years.
Follow up, cause the implementation of the amount to be paid to government from net profit of the public enterprises.
Upon the request of the board, submit a request with its recommendation to the Administrative Council of the Government the amount of state dividend to be given to an enterprise, execute upon approval.
Undertake study on a means of building the capacity of public enterprises for effective achievements of their objectives, submit it to the Administrative Council of the Government, upon approval follow up its implementation.
Submit purchase plan of fixed assets that is necessary for the activities of an enterprise; submit to the Administrative Council for approval; cause its implementation upon approval. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Issue Directives with regards to writing off the accounts of public enterprises and follow up its implementation.
Formulate policy with regards to public enterprises, execute upon approval; provide strategic directions for public enterprises.
Without prejudice to the powers and duties given to the Board, perform other functions necessary for the protections of the ownership rights of the state.
Members of the Board
Based on the standard of the enterprise, the number of members of the Board may be from five to eleven.
Not more than one third of the members of the Board shall be elected by the general assembly of the permenant workers. The rest of the members of the Board shall be appointed by the Authority
The members of the Board shall be appointed or elected on the basis of their profession, experience and competence.
Any member of a Board may also be appointed as a Board member of any other non competing enterprise.
The term of office of the members of the Board shall be three years; where necessary a member of a Board may be reelected or reassigned at the expiry of his term of office for the next one term only.
Where any member of the Board resigns from membership, the chairperson of the Board shall bring the matter to the attention of the Authority so that another person is assigned in the same manner.
Where a member of the Board could not fulfill his responsibilities effectively; was consecutively absent from a meeting more than three times or was absent for or more than five times in one fiscal year, the Authority submits a proposal for his dismissal to the organ that assigned him.
Meeting Procedures of the Board
The Board shall have a regular meeting at least once a month.
The chairperson shall call a meeting where there is an urgent matter or here at least more than fifty percent of the members of the Board so request.
The agenda of the meeting shall be communicated to the Board members in advance.
The meeting commences where a majority of the members are present.
The Board shall take a decision by a majority vote, in case of a tie the chairperson shall have a casting vote
The Board shall have a minute signed by the members.
The Board shall select and assign a secretary from among the employees of the enterprise.
The General Manager of the enterprise shall attend meetings of the Board without having the right to vote
The Board shall draw its own working procedure.
Powers and Duties of the Board
The accountability of the board shall be to the Authority, and shall have the following powers and duties:
Appoint and dismiss the General Manager of the enterprise and decide his salary and allowance.
Propose to the Authority for the increase or decrease of the enterprise's capital.
Submit books of account to external and internal auditors, also periodic reports on the state of activities and financial reports of an enterprise to the Authority.
Study and propose the purchase of equipment and fixed asset that are necessary for the enterprise; and based on the decision cause to be implemented. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Approve the sale of fixed asset that is not necessary for the enterprise.
Ensure that books of accounts and properities of the enterprise are kept properly.
Without prejudice to Article 27 of this Proclamation, the Board may request the Authority for additional contingency fund and upon permission cause to be assigned, and decide on its use.
Approves the enterprises’ work plan, budget and internal regulations, follow up and report its implementation to the Authority.
Approves the employment, assignment, salary and allowance of those officers of the enterprise accountable to the General Manager.
Prepare strategic plan compatible with the mission of the enterprises based on the direction given from the Authority, and submit it for approval; upon approval cause its implementation.
Accountability of the Board Members
The members of the Board, shall carry out their powers and duties with due care.
The members of Board shall be accountable individually and jointly for the damage caused on the enterprise by their failure to perform properly.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 2 of this Article, a Board member who dissented from the decision shouldhave to write and sign specifying his point of dissent so as not to be held accountable.
Powers and Duties of the General Manager of a Public Enterprise
The accountability of the General Manager shall be to the Board and have the following powers and duties:
Plan organize, direct, administer and control the activities of the enterprise.
Represent the enterprise in dealing with third parties.
Subject to the approval of the Board, employ, assign and define the functions of officers accountable to him.
Employ, assign, dismiss and determine the salary and allowance of other employees of the enterprises in accordance with its internal regulation and labor law.
Keeps proper books of accounts of the enterprise, and opens and operate bank accounts of the enterprise.
Shall sell fixed assets not needed by the enterprise based upon the approval of the Board and Directives of the Authority to be issued.
Prepare and submit to the Board the internal regulation as well as the work plan and budget of the enterprise and implement the same upon approval.
Implement and cause the implementation of the decisions of the Board.
Establish and preside over the meetings of the management committee; participate and brief, and submit a report on performance evaluation meetings conducted by the Authority.
Prepare a strategic plan inline with the directions set by the Board, submit to the Board for approval, implement and cause to implemented upon approval.
Perform other duties assigned to it by the Board.
Responsiblity and Liability of the General Manager
The General Manager shall be liable for the damage he causes on the enterprise through negligence or intentionally in the process of dispensing his responsibility.
CHAPTER FOUR
Capital of Public Enterprise
Capital Needed to Establish a Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall have a capital.
The Authority shall cause the initial capital needed to be allocated by the Administrative Council.
The capital of an enterprise may be in cash or in kind.
Where it is paid in kind the Authority shall ensure that the property is correctly valued in accordance with Article 5 and Sub-Article 1 (a) of this Proclamation or conforms with the book value thereof.
Paid Up and Authorized Capital
The amount of the paid up capital of an enterprise at the time of its establishment shall not be less than 25% of its authorized capital.
The authorized capital of an enterprise shall be fully paid up within five years from the date of its establishment.
Where the authorized capital is not fully paid up as provided under sub- Article 2 of this Article, the Authority shall, without prejudice to the right of the third parties adjust the capital to the level of the paid up capital.
Increase of Authorized Capital The Authority may cause the funds needed to increase the capital of an enterprise to be allocated by the Government or to be paid out of the income of the enterprise.
Decreasing of Capital The capital of an enterprise may without prejudice to the right of third parties to decrease, where:
The auditor proposes for the capital to be decreased;
It was decided for the capital to decrease following a proposal submitted by the Board;
The authorized capital of the enterprise has not been fully paid as provided for under Sub-Article 2 of Article 18 of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER FIVE
Name and Trademark of a Public Enterprise
Name of a Public Enterprise
The name of a public enterprise is the name under which the enterprise carries on its activities and shall clearly designate such activities.
The enterprise shall not go against government policy and offend the moral of the society, and also it shall not prejudice the right of third parties.
An enterprise shall display its name outside its premises.
Restrictions in the Use of the Name
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of the name of a public enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation and prohibit such enterprise from using the name giving rise to this dispute.
TrademarkA 
trademark is a name, designation, emblem or any other distinctive sign used by an public enterprise to distinguish its goods and services.
Restrictions in the Use of Trademarks
A public enterprise may choose any kind of trademark.
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of a trademark of an enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
Before the trademark is used, it shall be registered by the appropriate government office and published in a news paper with wider circulation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Sub- Article 2 of this Article and/or prohibit such enterprise from using the trademark giving rise to the dispute
CHAPTER SIX
Accounts and Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
SECTION ONE
Public Enterprise Accounts
Accounting Principles
Any public enterprise shall keep books of accounts following a generally accepted accounting principles. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Financial Year, Closing of Accounts and Financial Reports
The financial year of an enterprise shall be from July 1st to June 30th E.C.
Any public enterprise shall close its accounts at least once a year.
The annual closing of accounts shall be completed within three months following the end of the financial year and shall be open to an external auditor
The enterprise shall prepare work performance report on plans of major activities and program to the Authority.
Failure to close, in due time, the account of an enterprise in accordance with Sub-Article 2 of this Article may entail liability.
Reserve Funds and Its Utilization
Any public enterprise shall have alegal reserve fund.
Any public enterprise shall annually transfer 5 % of its net profit to legal reserve fund until such fund equals 20 % of the capital of the enterprise.
The legal reserve fund may be utilized for covering: (a) Losses, and (b) Unforeseeable expenses and liabilities;
The Board of any public enterprise with the approval of the Authority, may cause the enterprises to secure other reserve funds and may decide on its usalization. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Payment of Taxes and Duties
The relevant laws concerning taxes and duties shall be applicable on the enterprises.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the right of an enterprise to be exempted from taxes and duties under any other law, shall be effective.
Payment of State Dividend
Public enterprises shall pay state dividend within six months from the end of the budget year and deposit to the bank account of the Government development fund.
SECTION TWO
Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
Assignment of an Auditor
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Auditor General of Oromia given by the law, the account of each enterprise shall be audited by an external auditor approved by the Authority.
The Authority shall ascertain that the external auditors assigned satisfies the criteria set by the Office of Auditor General of Oromia and that they are free from any form of influence.
The Authority shall determine the term of an external auditor
Obligation to Cooperate for Audit
Any person who has received, paid or expended or is in charge of the accounts of the money or property of the enterprise being audited shall, when requested have the obligation to produce to the enternal and external auditors the accounts to be audited and to provide the necessary information.
Accountability, Power, Duties of an Auditor
Accountability, power and duties of auditors related to this Proclamation is applicable in consistence with the commercial and civil codes.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Amalgamation and Division of Public Enterprises
Basic Principle
Two or more enterprise may be amalgamated by the decision of the Administrative Council and form a new enterprise or take over one enterprise.
An enterprise may be divided by the decision of the Administrative Council in to two or more enterprises.
The decision to amalgamate or divide shall be effected based on research proposal presented by the Authority.
Before amalgamation or division of the enterprises, the Authority shall inform the interest and accountability of the third party.
In the event that an enterprise which is being considered for amalgamation or division has obligation towards creditors, no decision shall be taken to amalgamate or divide, if the enterprise resulting from the amalgamation or division is unable to meet the obligation towards the creditors.
The accounts of an enterprise to be amalgamated or divided shall be closed and audited from the beginning of the financial year up to the date of the amalgamation or division
Transfer of Right and Obligation
The rights and obligation of an amalgameted enterprise shall be transferred to the newly created enterprise.
The Authority shall prepare a proposal with regards to the distribution of the rights and obligations among the enterprises divided and the newly established enterprises resulting from the division.
The proposal prepared by the Authority shall be submitted to the Administrative Council for decision; up on approval a copy shall be sent to the newly established enterprises.
As provided here under Sub-Article 3 of this Article, the Authority shall put the major points of decisions passed in a notice either on Afan Oromo, Amharic or English newspaper with wider circulation.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, where there is an obligation entered with a third party previously, the new enterprises resulting from the division shall be individually and jointly liable towards the creditors.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Dissolution and Winding–up of Accounts
Grounds for Dissolution of an Enterprise
An enterprise may be dissolved for any one of the following reasons;
On the expiry of the life of the enterprise fixed in its establishment law;
Completion of the venture for which the enterprise is established;
Failure to achieve the purpose of the enterprises and where its implementation is found to be impossibile;
Loss of fifty percent of the paid up capital or due to bankruptcy;
Where the Administrative Council passes a decision to dissolve the enterprise;
Decision of the court declaring the enterprise bankrupt.
Appointment, Duties and Powers of Liquidators
Where cases referred under Article 34 of this Proclamation occur, the Authority shall assign one or more liquidators outside the employees of the enterprise in line with the criteria set by the Auditor General.
The Authority may dismiss the liquidators and appoint other liquidators for good cause.
The liquidators shall take over the books and accounts of the enterprise under liquidation.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the liquidators shall take over the property of the enterprise and manage it.
Liquidators have the powers and duties of the Board and the General Manager given by this Proclamation.
The liquidators may not undertake new business other than the execution of contracts still running with third party or where the interests of the winding up so require.
The Board shall prepare a report for the liquidators on the affairs of the enterprise covering the period from the end of the last financial year to the date the winding-up started.
The liquidators and the Board shall jointly prepare and sign a statement of affairs summarizing the rights and obligations of the enterprise.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the Board and the General Manager shall assist the liquidators in carrying out their duties.
Calling on Creditors
The liquidators shall inform creditors of the proposed dissolution of the enterpriseand require them to file their claims with supporting documents.
Liquidators shall notify to the creditors by notice published in three successive weekly issued newspaper with wider circulation.
A notification shall be sent to those creditors whose address is known.
Creditors may submit their claims within 90 days from the date the letter is delivered or from the last issue of the notice in the news paper.
The liquidators shall prepare and submit financial statement of the enterprise and sequential term payment of a debt if any, and report to the Authority.
The Authority, after taking into consideration the financial statement and recommendation prepared by the liquidators shall decide the payment of the debt. (a) Authorize the payment of creditors who have filed their claims. (b) Where the balance of the enterprise is not sufficient to cover the debt due to creditors, authorize the liquidators to sell assets of the enterprise based on the Directive to be issued without affecting the right of the third party.
Where the total assets of the enterprise are not sufficient to pay off its debts and the authorized capital is not fully paid up, the liquidators shall submit to the Authority for the payment of the debt.
Provision of Creditors
Where known creditors have failed to file their claims within the time limit specified under Article 37 Sub-Article 4 of this Proclamation, the amounts due to them shall be deposited in a bank to the names of the creditors.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 37 Sub-Article 4, after the enterprise ceased to exist, creditors not cited in the books of the enterprise may claim from the surplus assets collected by the Government, provided their failure to claim within the time-limit was due to force majeure. Where the creditors have not been paid due to  the liquidator's negligence, the liquidators shall be accountable.
Sums shall be set aside to meet claims in respect of undertakings of the enterprise which are not completed or disputed claims where the creditors have not been guaranteed until the dispute is settled.
Final Balance Sheet and Publication of Notice of Dissolution
After the money to the creditors have been set aside to meet potential claims pursuant to Article 38 Sub-Article 1 of this Proclamation, the liquidators shall prepare a final balance sheet showing surplus assets, if any, and submit the same to Authority.
The liquidators shall submit a copy of the balance sheet to Auditor General's Office and Oromia Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
The Auditor General shall promptly forward its comments, if any, to Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
As per the permission of Finance and Economic Development Bureau, the Authority approve the final balance sheet, and shall submit the dissolution proposal to the Administrative Council and cause its approval.
The Administrative Council shall then repeal the establishment Proclamation and bylaws of the enterprise.
The enterprise's right and obligation shall cease to exist as of the date of repeal of its establishment Proclamation.
The books of the dissolved enterprise shall be deposited with the Authority where they shall be kept for ten years. Any interested organ may inspect such books after payment of the prescribed fee.
Assets Due to the Government
Any surplus assets of an enterprise dissolved and liquidated shall devolve to the Government account.
CHAPTER NINE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power to Issue Regulation
The Administrative Council may issue a Regulation for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Applicable Laws
Ethiopian Commercial and civil code shall be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
The Regional State Enterprises Proclamation No. 16/1997 is hereby repealed by this Proclamation.
Laws and practices inconsistent with this Proclamation, shall have no effect  with respect to matters provided for in this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall enter into force as of the 14th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of the National Regional State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 14th of July 2013
A Proclamation to Amend Oromia Regional Government Cities Re-establishment Proclamation No.195/2016
Whereas, it is found necessary to amend some Articles from Oromia Regional State Government Cities Proclamation No. 195/2016;
Now, therefore, in accordance with Article 49 (3) (a) of the Revised Constitution of Oromia Regional Government No. 46/2002, it is proclaimed as follows.
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as " Proclamation No. 196/2016, a Proclamation to Amend Oromia Regional State Cities Re-establishment Proclamation No.195/2016."
Amendment
Proclamation No.195/2016 is hereby amended as follows:
Article 2(14) and Article 5(1) (a) are cancelled and the other subsequent sub-articles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
The term 'regio-polis' in articles 2(3), 5(4 and 11), 12(2 and 3), 23(3), 28(1and 5), 33 and 34 is cancelled.
Article 5(12) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 5(12) The grade promotion of the cities which have city administration council and municipality shall be provided only where it is submitted by the Bureau and decided by the Regional State Administration Council. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Following Article 5(12), a new sub-article 13 is added 5(13) The grade promotion of the growing municipality city shall be submitted by the Zonal Industry and Urban Development Office and approved by the Bureau. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 6(1) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 6(1)The request for legal personality of the residents of particular area whose population size is 2000 and above shall be decided by the Bureau after it has been submitted Zonal Industry and Urban Development Office through their representatives.
Articles 9 and 10 are cancelled and the subsequent articles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
Article 18(1) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 18(1) The power vested in Dis trict Council by the Regional State Constitution shall be applicable on the Cities Council; and it shall implement; cause the implementation of the power and duties provided to the cities under Article 11 of proclamation No.195/2016.
The term described as "City District" under Articles 2(8), 2(15), 5(11), 12(1) (b and c), 12(2),14(1-3),17(3), 32, 32(1-5), 33, 34(3,4,6 and7), 36, 40, 54(2) is cancelled and replaced by the term subcity.
Article 32(1) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 32(1) A sub-city shall be a structure next to the city administration and may be organized by the population size of 40,000 and above. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 35(3) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 35(3) In the cities having legal personality, a city kebele may be established by population size of 5,000 and above. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
A provision stipulated under article 36 is cancelled and replaced by the following: 36 Power and Duties of Kebele: 36(1) The power and duties vested in the kebele Administration by the Regional State Constitution shall also be applicable on the City kebele Administration.
Without prejudice to subarticle 1 of this article, the citykebele administration shall share and implement the power and duties provided to the sub-cities at its level in the cities having sub-cities; and in the cities which have no sub-cities by sharing the power and duties provided to the city administrationb depending on the issue at hand. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 52(2) is cancelled and replaced by the following; and the new sub-articles 3 and 4 are added and the subsequent subarticles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
The regular income that the cities collect shall be performed depending on the annual income and budget plan provided from the Region; and the Regional Administration Councilshall decide the amount that the cities may use from the regular income they have collected in the excess of their budget. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
where the cities collect regular income beyond their plan, they may use it for the benefits of their city in the next fiscal year through proclaiming with the city council.
The Regional Administration council may allocate additionalbudget to the cities it believes require due consideration. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 58(2) is cancelled and the subsequent articles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
Inapplicable Laws
Any proclamation, regulation, directive and work practice contrary to this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered inthis proclamation.
Duty to Cooperate
Anybody has a duty to provide support for the implementation of this proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall come in to force from the date of its publication on 'magalata Oromia
Finfinne
April 3, 2016 Muktar Kedir
President of Oromia National Regional State
A proclamation to Revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation NO 195/2015.
Whereas, it is found necessary to make the cities of the regional state to be centers of development, industry, technology, information and trade as well as comfortable centers for life in a modern way observing their level of development.
Whereas, it has become necessary to provide a condition by which the cities shall be structured and their power and duties be determined based on the constitutional principles of the rights of the people to self administration at different levels;
Whereas, it is found necessary to create a favorable condition which can speed up the development of
the cities in the region by making their work procedures and structural organization to depend on the principle of good governance so as to enable them that by possessing higher development capacities, promote the growth of the regional state and improve the living standards of their residents;
By creating a conducive environment for the speedy and effective service rendering, and thereby increasing the participation and being beneficiary of the people, to enable them work to realize a viable peace and order and ensure rule of law in the cities as well as to ensure a fast development from which the people can benefit step by step throughstrengthening a solid integration within the different cities and between the cities and rural areas; 
Now, Therefore, in accordance with article 49(3) (a)of the Revised Oromia Regional State Constitution, it is here by proclaimed as follows.
Part One
General Provisions
Short title
This proclamation may be cited as “A proclamation to revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation No. 195/2015.”
Definitions
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:-
“Region” means the Oromia regional state
“City” means a city which has got legal personality as being a city
“City Administration” means a city which has got legal personality, and has its own council, administration council and the Judiciary established at Regio polis city ,principal city, higher city, intermediate city and growing city levels.
“Caffee” means Oromia regional state government “Caffee”.
. “Regi onalAdmi n i s t r at i on council” means the highest executive body of the Regional State Government Administration.
“Council” A body established as a representative at the city administration and kebele level by the election of the people.
“Court” means an ordinary court established at the city administration level that has jurisdiction over the matters to be tried at the ordinary courts and on the cases arising in the city.
“Administration council” means an executive body to be established at the city Administration, at the city district and at the city kebele levels.
“Constitution” means Oromia Regional State Constitution
“Mayor” means a chief executiv e officer of a city administration.
“City Manager” means an official who executes the municipal services of the city administration.
“Municipality Services” shall include Services such as water and sewage services, construction and maintenances of roads, fire dangers and accidents prevention, city land development, sanitation and beautification of a city , regular services provided to the residents and other activities to be decided and performed by the city.
“Bureau” means the Industry and Urban Development Bureau of Oromia.
“Regio polis city” means those cities that help to develop their surrounding cities by being centers of developments in various dimensions.
“City district” means the body in the organizational structure of a city next to the city administrationwhich has an administration council and established as having the power of executive body of its level and is given the level of district.
“ kebele” means the initial city administration structure replacing the former kebele administration of a city which has a council, executive organ and social court of its own in the cities of the regional state in accordance with this proclamation.
“The city enactment” means a mandatory law issued by a city which is enforced in the city concerned.
“Government activity” means Activities performed by the government sectors in the city administration.
“Regulation protecting body” means without prejudice to the law protecting power vested in other bodies, it is a body established for protecting and enforcing the laws in the jurisdictions of the cities.
“City Associations” means asso ciations established by the cities which have legal personality for their mutual development benefits.
Gender description
In this proclamation, any expression in the masculine gender shall also applies to the feminine.
Scope of application
This proclamation shall be applicable on any city of the regional state having legal personality.
Part two
The Establishment, level, Power and Functions of the cities.
The level and Accountability of the cities.
The cities of the regional state shall be grouped in to the following grades depending on the development they achieved and the criteria to be set.
 The Regio polis city Administration
 The principal city Administration
 The Higher city Administration
 TheIntermediate city Administration
 The Growing city Administration
 The Municipality city Admin istration
 The Growing municipal city Administration
The Grade of the cities of the regional state shall be evaluated depending on the criteria Provided as follows:-
The income which the city collects
 Number of population
 The surface area of the city
 Its being center of Administrati on seat.
The implementation of sub article 2(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The accountability of the Regio polis city, principal city, and higher city shall be to the city’s council and to the Regional State president office.
The accountability of intermediate city and growing city shall be to the city’s council and the Zonal Administration office.
The accountability of municipal city and growing municipal city shall be to the district council and district administration office.
The means of providing supports to the cities of the regional state with thegrades specified under sub articles (a-g) of this article shall be decided by the Regional Administrative Council through identifying their grades and the support to be made.
Regarding the rural kebeles having the characteristics of cities but fail to fulfill the criteria of a city, the cities serving as the seats of districts and not included in the grades of the cities of the regional state provided in this proclamation, the bureau may consider them as a growing municipality and give them legal personality and decide their powers and functions.
Notwithstanding to the provisions of sub articles 2(a-d) of this article, the Regional Administration Council may extraordinarily decide the grade of a city and issue additional evaluation criteria of the grades of the cities. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The ways as to how any city may may be promoted to the next grade or downgraded from its grade, the tenure of the grade and other matters shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city administrations which are on the grades of Regio polis and the principal city administrations may establish the city district structural organization where they fulfill the criteria provided for city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Promotion of grade of any city shall be given only where its proposal is submitted by the Bureau and decided by the Regional Administration Council. Its details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Acquiring legal personality
Residents of a particular area may submit their request of acquiring city’s legal personality to the bureau through their representatives.
The request to be submitted as per sub article (1) of this article shall be in writing and shall fulfill the following criteria.
 Evidence revealing the boarders  of the living place of the applicants given from the concerned government body.
 The surface area of the place and population number
 A description about the socioeconomic activities and the services found at that place.
 Evidence describing that 25% from the people residing in that area qualified for voting have supported the application.
 The plan prepared for the city which is approved by the concerned body.
 Other criteria provided by the directive to be issued by the bureau.
The bureau shall review and decid e on the application submitted for acquiring legal personality of being a city within three (3) months and provide evidence describing the legal personality of the grade of the city.
Where the request for acquiring legal personality is not accepted, a written response shall be given to the applying body or their representatives by clearly specifying the reason for its non acceptance.
The bureau shall provide an evidence of legal personality for the city where it decides to provide such legal personality to a city.
Their grades shall be described thereof when the evidence of legal personality of the cities is provided
The effect of acquiring legal personality. 
Any city that has acquired legal personality in accordance with this proclamation shall have the right to be called in its name, implement the powers and functions specified in this proclamation, the right to enter in to contracts, the right to own properties and may sue or be sued.
Cancellation of legal personality.
The legal personality of a city may only be cancelled or revoked where the city concerned is unable to observe and exercise the criteria of a city by defending the legal personality granted to it.
The bureau shall provide the necessary support to a city before canceling or revoking the legal personality of a city.
Where the legal personality of of a city is cancelled or revoked, the rights and duties of the city shall be transferred to the body for which the city has been previously accountable. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Merging of the cities.
The adjacent cities may be merge d where it is believed appropriate for service delivery and administrative activities depending on the interest and agreement of the residents when it is approved by the city council and based on the research conducted by of the bureau.
In accordance with this article sub article 1, the merging of the cities shall be submitted to the Regional Administration Council by the bureau and shall be approved. Anybody shall implement such decision.
Change of name of a city Administration.
Any city shall called by the name name acquired legal personality the change of name of a city shall be made depending on the interest and agreement of the residents of the city submitted to the concerned city administration council and decided when deemed necessary.
The request decided by the city council as per sub article 1 of this article shall be approved by the Regional Administration Council.
The powers and functions of the cities
Any city shall have the powers and functions to:-
 Decide on the social, econom ic and political activities in a way that participates the population of the city and make them the beneficiaries from the development achieved.
Work to ensure good govern ance, and lay a transparent and accountable system.
Prepare the social, economic and budget plan of the city and implement same.
 Administer the budget of the city according to the law. Determine the tax and service incomes as per the law; collects or make to be collected, and spend them on the growth and development activities or purposes of the city
Borrow money based on the decisions of the regional state or the city’s council.
 Legally administer the houses under the city administration.
 Administer the human resource of the city in accordance with the regional states’ civil servant law.
 Create legal relationships and contractual agreements with government bodies, private investors, community associations, and with other fellow cities.
 Without prejudice to the provision under article 40 sub article8 of the constitution, it make one’s private property for public use by paying equivalent compensation in advance where the public interest requires so.
Create mutually beneficiary brotherly agreements with other cities in the country or outside the country depending on the provisions of this proclamation or other laws.
 Ensure that the construction activities underway in the city to be in such a way that protects the cleanliness, beauty and plan of the city.
 Administer and make productive the land under its master plan or which is found within its territory
 Depending on the regulation and directives to be issued, register and provide legal personalities for persons who want to organize in association for building homes; it also conducts researches regarding residential homes constructed with savings; and implement where it is authorized.
 Register contractual agreements of purchases and sales, house rents, houses attached in securities.
 Provide a speedy, effective and just service for the residents; particularly it constructs and maintains or causes the construction and maintenances of basic infrastructural services such as roads, potable water, electricity, telephonen and mass transportations.
 Perform environmental protecti ion activities such as wastes disposal, protection of environmental destruction, installation of pipe lines and other similar activities.
Provide social services like education, health services by emphasizing on preventive ways, HIV/AIDS prevention, Ambulance services, various evidences registration services, slaughter houses, Grave yards, markets and other similar services.
 Provide sporting services, theate rs, refreshments, entertainments, Library, museum and other similar services.
 Provide protection of peace and order of the society, justice services, protection of fire dangers, supervising medicines and foods.
 Facilitate ways of providing nurturing services of elders, people suffering from physical incapacities and orphans.
 Perform activities which help to improve the developments of the city and the lives of the society through implementing activities generating incomes and poverty reduction programs.
 Prepare or cause the preparation of the plan of the city, amend, approve and implement it.
 Lay a modern working system so as to enable the various services be delivered in high quality and speed and to ensure that the residents seats be arranged in a way that make them to be easily accessed.
 Organize tourist attraction areas in the cities, follow up and prove the proper managements of archeological fossils and cultural materials
 Work to improve the participa tion of the residents on the development activities by organizing them level by level, it also works to develop the participation of the society and make them beneficiaries particularly of the women and youth.
Considering the conduciveness of the services delivered by the cities to their residents, it may be made to be provided wholly or partially with other government bodiesor with private investor, or with the participation of the society or by other alternatives.
Part Three
Organization and management (managerial) Procedures of a city
Level of Administration power
Depending on the grade of a city, the level of power of the city administrations shall be provided as follows:-
 City Administration: –The city administration having full power.
 City district:-the organizational structure established following the city administration which has only the power of an executive body.
 kebele: - the initial administrati on level which is established following a city district.
The structure of city district shall be established following the city administration only in the cities having the grades of Regio polis and principal cities.
In the cities other than the Regio polis and principal city grades, the administration structure to be organized following the city administration is the kebele administration.
Organization of government bodies at the city level.
The organization of government bodies of the cities shall be as follows-
The council:-the Law making body
Administration council:- the Law enforcing body
The Judiciary: - the law interpreting body.
Organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city.
The organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city shall be made in accordance with the level of the city and based on the levels provided in accordance with this proclamation, and shall be established by a city district and the kebele
The management body of a city district level shall be organized by only executive body and it shall be an executive body next to the city administration which implements the power delegated to it from the city administration.
At the city district level, the struct ure of a court may be organized as deemed necessary by the decision of the government.
Organization of the city zone level government bodies.
Organization of the city kebele level government bodies shall be as follows:-
The council:- the city kebele level law making body
The administration council:- the city kebele level high executive body
The social court:- the city kebele level law interpreting body.
System of management of a city. 
The system of management of a city shall be “the mayor’s council” systemwhich shall be implemented  only in the cities having their own councils. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city council
The regular election of the city council shall be made every five years
Members of the city council being odd number and shall be elected at the city and kebele levels by the residents of the city in accordance with their votes casted freely and secretly.
The number of members of the city council shall be implemented according to the law issued to determine the number of members of the district, city and kebele councils.
Where it is found that the number ber of Oromo nations residing in the city administrations having their own councils is less, the Oromia regional state “Caffee” may make that 51% of the seats in the city council to be reserved for them through comparing the number of the Oromo people with the number of other people in the city. This provision shall also apply on the kebele level city councils.
In the city administrations having their own councils 20% of the seats in the city councils shall be reserved for the rural kebeles bordering the city. The representatives of these adjacent rural Kebeles bordering the city shall be represented by the Kebele council or kebele councils from the elects.
Any person shall fulfill the criteria specified by the national election law to compete for the election of city councils and shall also know the working language of the regional state AfaanOromoo.
The municipal city and growing municipal cities without the need to establish their own independent council, shall have participation in the district council as kebele or kebeles.
The powers and functions of the city council.
The city council shall have the powers and functions to:-
Implement or cause the implentati on of the powers and functions of the city councils provided under article 11 of this proclamation
Without prejudice to the provision of this article sub article 1, the city administration shall have the powers and functions to:-
 Issue city enactments or city ordinance on city matters being consistent with the policy, strategy and Laws of the regional state.
 Review and approve the socioeconomic and budget plan of the city submitted to it by the mayor; follow up its implementation.
 Decide the tax and service paym ents in accordance with the Law; Ensure its being collected.
 Follow up and supervise the land in the city whether it is administered in accordance with the law.
Approve the organizational structure of the city administration; decide the structure and work procedures of the executive bodies of the city; follows up its implementation.
 Establish permanent and temporary committees.
 Elect the speaker of the council among the members, decide on his activities.
 Elect the mayor of the city from the members of the council; approve his appointment.
 Elect the deputy mayor of the city from the members or nonmembers of the council.
 Establish the city administration council depending on the grade of the city; decide the number of members of the council depending on the recommendation of the mayor; approve the appointment of members of the council submitted by the mayor and decide about their work.
 Approve the city’s plan; follows up its implementation.
 Prepare work performance stan dards and the goals of the plan year and review the activities accordingly and pass decisions.
 Issue code of conducts for its members and follows up its implementation.
 Deliver work performance repo rts to the residents periodically
Term of office and Accountabili ty of the city council
The term of office of the city counc cil shall be five years
The city council shall be account able to the people and the Regional State“ Caffee”
The meeting procedure of the city council.
The city council shall have its regu lar meeting once in three months; extraordinary meeting may be called where the speaker or the mayor or 1/3 of members of the council requested so.
The presence of more than half of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the council.
The decision of the council shall be passed by the majority vote of the members participated on the meeting.
The meeting of the council shall be open to the public unless it is deemed necessary for the security of the city or moral of the public or to protect the rights of other members,
The council shall have a registry to register its activities and decisions.
The appointments of the speaker.
The speaker of the council shall be elected from the members of the council and is accountable to the council.
The term of office of the speaker shall be the term of office of the council.
Without prejudice to the provisio ns of sub article (2) of this article, the speaker may be removed from position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons.
 Voluntary resignation of his position
 Removed from his position by the council.
 Interruption of his being memb ership of the council
 Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively
The provision under sub article 3 (a-d) shall only be implemented where it is the city delivered to council and approved.
Particulars for the implementatio n of this article sub article 3(a-d) shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
Powers and Function of the speaker of the city council.
The speaker of the council shall have the following power and functions:-
Calls the council’s meeting; prepare agendas of the discussion, chairs the council’s meeting, organize the committees of the council.
Manages the administrative matt ers of the council, cause the enforcement of disciplinary measures taken on the members by the council and represents the city.
Extends the ways by which the council shall be organized by the permanent and temporary committee’s plans and follows up its implementation.
Prepares training plans designed for promoting or enhancing the members’ performance abilities; cause its implementation with the concerned executive bodies.
Ensure the transfer of decisions of the council to the concerned bodies; follows up its implementation,
Represents the council in all its relations with the third party.
Performs other activities assigned to it from the council.
The Appointments and Accountability of the mayor and deputy mayor
The mayor of a city shall be assigned from the members of the council and nominated by the council.
The deputy mayor of a city council shall be elected from the members or from the non-members of the council, and appointed by the city’s council.
The mayor of Rejio polis, principal city and higher city shall be accountable to the city’s council and to the president of the region.
Mayor of intermediate and grow ing cities shall be accountable to the city’s council and Chief Administrator of the zone.
Manager of municipal city and the growing municipal city shall be accountable to the district Administrator’s office.
The deputy mayor shall be accountable the mayor of a city.
The term of office of the mayor shall be the term of office of the council.
Subject to the provision of sub article 7 of this article, the mayor of a city may be removed from his position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons:-
 Voluntary resignation of his job
 Suspension from his responsibi lity by the council
 Interruption of his being memb ership of the council or
 His Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively.
The particulars of the enforcemen t of sub article 8(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
The powers and Functions of the mayor
The mayor shall have the powers and Functions to:-
Serve as the head and chief execut ive of a city.
Ensure the respect of the constitution and constitutional system as well as the law in the city.
Implement the policy, strategy and and the laws of the regional state and those enacted at national level and the decisions passed by the city council and the regional state administration council’ and cause their implementation, submit performance reports to the council and an organ to whom it is accountable.
Select members of the administration council and submit his proposal to the city council for approval of their appointment; manage their activities in accordance with the law.
Select the manager of a city depen ding on the abilities and leadership quality and submit to the city council for approval of his appointment.
Ensure the rendering of speedy, effective and just services by the manager of the city.
Represent the city on holiday even ts celebrated at a regional, national and public level.
Prepare the plan and budget of the city by discussing with the administration council and submit to the city council; implement or cause their implementation up on approval.
Organize forums in collaboration on with the concerned bodies so as to enable the people forward their opinions on the plan, budget, work performances and other issues of the city.
Perform other activities assigned to him from the city council, Office of the president and from the administration offices of different levels depending on the grades of the cities.
The power and duties of deputy mayor
The deputy mayor shall have the powers and functions to:-
Represent and perform activities of the mayor where he is not at office.
Perform other activities assigned to him by the city council and the mayor.
The city Administration council
The city Administration council may be established from the members or from the non –members of the city council.
The number of members of the cities’ administration council shall be decided by the city council depending on the recommendation of the mayor. The particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Members of the city Administration council shall be individually and jointly liable for the decision they pass.
Term of office of the Administration council shall be the term of office of the council.
The city Administration council shall be accountable to the mayor and the city council.
The Power and Functions of City Administration Council
The city administration council shall have the power and functions to;
Follow up and ensure the implementation of laws, decisions and grades made by the regional state and the decisions and grades made by the city council; cause the protection of the constitution, constitutional system and laws.
Manage and organize the governm ent activities performed in the city.
Prepare the budget of the city; implement up on its approval.
Prepare the social and economic development strategies as well as operational programs of the city; implement same up on approval.
Perform other activities assigned to it by the council and the mayor of the city.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager and Deputy Manager
The manager of Rigio polis, prin cipal, higher, medium level and growing city shall be appointed by the city council upon the nomination by the mayor of the city, being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The manager of the municipal city city and growing municipal city shall be appointed by district council upon the nomination by the chief administrator of the district being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The deputy manager shall be acco untable to the manager of the city.
The manager of a city shall be a member of the city administration council.
The Rigio polis and principal cities may have more than one deputy manager
The deputy manager of city shall be assigned by mayor of the city and nominated by the city council.
The accountability of the deputy ty manager shall be to the general manager of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager
The manager of a city shall have the power and functions:-
Serve as an executive of the city municipal services.
Manage and organize the city municipal services.
Develop and submit to the mayor, service delivery indicators and levels, ensure their implementations upon approval.
Ensure the implementation of policies, laws and levels approved by the regional state and the decisions of city council in the service delivery branches of the city.
Constitute and direct a management committee consisting of heads of service delivering bodies of the city.
Assign heads of service delivering bodies of the city
Recruit, administer and dismiss employees serving in the service delivering bodies of the municipal city according to the law.
Make recommendations, to the Mayor, for the establishment of municipal city service delivering bodies and alternative means of delivering different services; implement same when decided.
Organize and submit to the Mayor, standards and directives of service delivery; implement same upon approved.
Prepare and submit to the Mayor, the budget and work plan of the budget year of municipality service delivering bodies; implement same upon approval.
Receive and entertain the complaints of residents concerning the municipality services transparently; give speedy responses for the complaints.
Submit to the Mayor, periodic work performance and financial reports about services of municipality.
Power and Functions of Deputy Manager
Deputy Manager shall have the following power and functions:-
Serve as deputy manager and de partment organizer.
Act on behave of city manager, where he is absent or unable to perform his activities.
Perform his branch’s functions and other activities, which are specifically identified and assigned to him by the city manager.
Establishment and Accountability of sectorial offices of the cities
The sectorial offices and different services delivering institutions shall be established in accordance with the grade of the city and they may be accountable to the mayor or their superior. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the regional state administration council.
Establishment of City District
The city district shall be the struct ture following city administration that may be organized with the number of population from 10,000 to 20,000. Its particulars shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
The city district may estabilish by 4 (four) or more than kebeles.
The city district shall be accountable to the people and to the city administration.
The city district shall have its own government structure in order to provide speedy and effective services.
A permanently operating executive body shall be established in the city district and its functions shall be the functions of the city administration council provided under article 26 of this proclamation. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Rigio polis and principal city shall be proposed by the executive committee of city district and appointed by the mayor of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Regio polis and principal city, being accountable to the manager of the city and executive organ of the district and shall have the following power and functions:
Participate, without a vote, in the meetings of the city council.
Implement and cause the implementation of the service delivery activities of the city.
Being together with the manager of the city, make recommendation about alternative implementation of different activities for the services delivery in the city district and city kebeles; implement same when allowed.
Administer employees of the municipality of the city district in accordance with the law.
Submit work performance reports to the manager of the city.
prepare work plan of the city distri ct depending on the plan of the city; implement same upon approval.
Pass decision on issues relating to city services in the city district.
Perform other additional functions assigned to him by the manager of the city.
Establishment of City Kebele
The City Kebele shall be established by this proclamation as the lower administrative structure in the cities having or not having council.
The City Kebele shall be organized by the government power structures of the council, the administration council and the social court.
A City Kebele may be established having the number of population from 2,000 to 10,000. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The City Kebele shall have rules and regulations enforcement body.
Power and Function of Kebele
Without prejudice to the powers and functions give to kebele by Regional constitution , the city Kebele shall have the powers and function of its levels by sharing it from the city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment of Kebele Manager
The manager of a city Kebele, being evaluated by his professional ability and leadership efficiency, shall be nominated by the chairperson of the kebele, and appointed by the Kebele council.
Part Four
Establishment of Regular and Social Courts of a City
Establishments of Regular Courts
Cities of different hierarchy shall have the court having judicial power, which shall be established in cities having their own councils as deemed necessary.
The city court to be established as per this proclamation shall be realized with the request of Oromia Supreme Court depending on the research.
The structure of these courts shall be in accordance with the structure and practices of the regional state courts.
As per this article, city matters entertained by the courts at the city administration level shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Establishment of Social Courts
A social court, which shall have jurisdiction over petty offences committed in the city, shall be established at City Kebele level.
The city kebele social court shall be accountable to the city Kebele council.
The powers and functions of the kebele social courts provided by proclamation shall be applicable on the city kebele social courts.
Establishment of Regulation enforcement body
Every city district and city Kebele shall establish rules and regulation enforcement body; whose number may vary according to the differences of the district or the kebele. Its particulars shall be decided by the internal regulation to be issued by the city council.
Part Five
Relationships of the Cities with the Residents and Other Bodies
Relations with the Residents
The relationship of the cities with the residents shall depend on the fundamental constitutional principle that says, “All power emanates from the people”.
It is only the people of the city who can elect or remove from their power members of the city councils. The people in the city alone may recall the representatives they have elected for the city administration council.
Ensuring the Peoples’ Participation
Residents, civic associations, and private sectors shall made to discuss and express their views on the work programs, budget proposals, project ideas, work performances, finance and audit reports of the fiscal year.
Whether the city have council or not, the city administration shall facilitate forums at least once in every three months to enable the residents of the city whether , civic associations, and private sectors to discuss and present their views on various issues concerning the city.
Without prejudices to this article sub article 2, A public meeting may be called by the city where the circumstance so requires.
The city administration shall devic e different strategies and facilitates conditions to encourage residents of the city to participate in the different boards or committees established for the purpose city matters.
Any city has a duty to give a prom pt response to questions and complaints raised by the residents.
Relationship Between the City and City Kebele
The power, function and internal organization of city kebele shall be based principle of decentralization, which its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city kebele council may make proposal to the city administration or district administration on matters relating to the development activities of the kebele.
Federal or Regional government function matters that used to be performed by the city kebele and excluded from the powers and functions of a city as per this proclamation may be performed in accordance with the agreement made between the regional government and the city administration.
Part Six
Relationships between the Cities and Regional Government
General Principles
Based on the recognition that cities are autonomous; accountable and responsible to the regional government; the relationship between the cities and regional government shall be guided by the spirit of cooperation, partnership, collaboration and rule of law.
The relationship between the regional government and the cities shall facilitate favorable condition for coordinated planning and flow of information.
Regional government and Cities Partnership
To perform its powers and functions the city may work together in coordination or by agreement with the administrative bodies or institutions of the regional government to play its role.
The regional Government may organize regional organs when deemed necessary or perform regional government powers and functions in the city.
Enactment and Enforcement of Laws and Standards
The regional government may provide necessary technical support to enable cities to perform their powers and functions by issuing necessary laws and standards.
The cities shall be responsible to ensure the enforcement of laws and observance standards.
The decisions rendered and work ing system established by the cities shall be consistent with the policies, strategies, programs and laws issued at regional state and at country level.
How the Regional Government Assists the Cities
Without prejudice to the grant regional government may give for the implementation of specific projects, the regional government shall provides development assistance to the cities basis of competitiveness and equity.
The regional government shall create favorable conditions within which cities can develop and grow.
Establishing Joint Committee
In order to strengthen urban-rural economic interaction, the cities may establish joint committee with the adjoining district to work cooperatively on issues of mutual interest.
Boundary dispute arising between the cities and the ad-joining rural kebele shall be settled amicably between the city and concerned rural kebele. Failing such amicable settlement, the decision of regional administration council shall be final.
How Cities Submit their Re-ports
The cities shall submit quarterly and annual work performance and financial reports to the body for which they are accountable; submit audit reports to the body for which they are accountable as found necessary.
The body to which the report is submitted may periodically review the reports and give feedbacks to ensure the accuracy of the reports.
Dissolution of City Council
"Caffee" may cause city council to be dissolved “” when it believes that operation of the city council poses a threat to the federal and regional state's constitution, or where serious security problems or human right violations which cannot be controlled as well as where it believes that serious injury to the public interest has been occurred.
Where the city administration council dissolves in accordance of sub article 1 of this article, the temporary administration shall be nominated by the regional council; caffee of the region shall make arrangement with the concerned body to make fresh elections within the time fixed. The details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Part Seven
City Finance and Budget Administration
Fiscal year
The fiscal year of cities shall be the fiscal year of the regional government.
Revenue Sources of Cities
Income of cities shall be from the following sources:
 Revenue and taxes authorized by law and service delivery fees collected from services they render.
 Budget support granted by the regional government.
 Loans and Assistances
 Other income sources
Every regular income or revenue collected at the city level shall be income of the cities. The condition by which cities support each other shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Without prejudice to Sub-article (2) of this Article, it shall be effective from the next budget year.
The cities shall receive payment for the function they perform to the regional government.
Prior to the implementation of the loan of the cities in accordance with sub-article (1)c of this article, its importance shall be decided by regional state administration council.
The cities may borrow money from the federal or regional governments as well as from the legally recognized financial institutions. The loan obtained in such a way shall be allocated only for the expenses the of capital projects.
Details of the condition of loan and their payments shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Administration System and Books of Accounts
Every city shall have power and responsibility to systemically organize and administer its property.
The financial system of every city shall be implemented in accordance with the regional state financial system.
Every city shall have complete and accurate books of account and financial documents.
The Bureau shall make necessary supports for the cities to improve their efficiencies of budget preparation and performances. details of the condition shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Reporting Systems
The mayor shall present the financial reports of the city administration to the city council twice a year; also discloses it to the public.
The manager of a city district, municipality, and growing municipality shall present the financial reports of the city periodically to the body to whom it is accountable; also discloses it to the public.
Auditing System
Every city shall have internal Audit.
The internal auditor, who shall be accountable to accountable to the head of the institution, shall ensure on day-by-day basis that the resources of the city are being implemented in accordance with the relevant financial regulations.
Part Eight
Human Resource Management of cities
General Principles
Recruitment and administration of human resource of the cities shall be in accordance with administration of civil servant law of the regional state.
Every city shall have power to recruit, administer, specify the power and duties, decide the salary and benefits and dismiss its employees in accordance with the regional state civil servant law.
Except for political appointees, the placement of city officers and employees shall be carried out depending on their efficiency and importance to the position based on sufficient examination.
Applicability of the regional state civil servants law
The Regional state government civil servant law shall also be applicable on the employees of the municipality service.
Part Nine
City Plan
Power to Prepare and Implement City Plan
Every city shall have the power to prepare, cause to be prepared, approve, amend and implement a city plan.
The cities shall observe the fundamental principles, guidelines and standards of plan preparation of the regional state and the federal government in the process of plan preparation. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Notwithstanding to the provision under sub article (1) of this article,the power to approve the planof the municipal and growing municipality cities shall be the district council.
The bureau, with the concerned body, may review the city plan to ascertain its conformity with the condition provided under sub-article 2 of this article; add necessary improvements on the plan if necessary; submit it to the city or district councils.
Enabling City Residents Participate
The residents of the city shall have rights to participate and forward their views in all phases of plan preparation and implementation.
The city shall device the system and favorable condition by which residents of the city can efficiently express their opinions and forward their views in the preparation and implementation of the city plan.
Part Ten
Association of Cities
Establishment
Cities in the region may establish associations of their own and actively participate in the operation thereof.
The association shall be registered by the appropriate government body and acquire legal personality.
The structural and manner of operation of the association shall be determined by its memorandum of association and internal regulation.
Power and Functions of Associations of the Cities
The association of cities, without prejudice to the power and functions provided under its memorandum of association and internal regulation; shall have the following power and functions;
Works to realize the existence of inter-city cooperation; sharing of experiences and ideas.
Represent cities and exchange their views on matters of common interest.
Work to strength the performance abilities of the cities by providing trainings and material support for its members.
Create strong relationships with local and foreign city associations in consultation with the Bureau; and
Carry out other activities that would enhance the developments of cities in the region.
Part Eleven
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power and Functions of the Bureau
Notwithstanding powers and duties entrusted to it by other laws, the bureau shall have the powers and responsibilities to follow up and ensure the implementation of all matters provided in this proclamation, and policies, strategies, and laws relating to the cities of the regional state,
Advice the regional state government on matters relating to cities; undertake or cause to be undertaken different researches concerning cities; submit it to concerned bodies; implement same when authorized,
Submit work performance reports of the cities to the regional state government
Prepare directives and working practices to enable the urban land to be used economically and for highly beneficial purposes in accordance with the plan of the city; cause to be implemented; supervise and control,
Conduct researches periodically concerning the technical and material supports necessary for the cities, as well as issues that strengthen their performance abilities; and submit to the concerned bodies; implement or cause it to be implemented when authorized,
Entertain and decide on the request of residents to obtain legal personality of being a city,
Reviews the request of the cities for promotion to the next grade and submit its proposal to the regional administration council; implements same upon approval,
Support cities of the regional state to create and strengthen relationship with other cities in the country and outside the country,
Work for the existence of favorable working relationships between the regional government and cities of the regional state government,
Transitory Provisions
The regional state government administration council may decide on how this proclamation can be implemented at different levels in various cities.
As per the provision of sub article (1) of this article, the current city administration may be made to continue functioning until the election of members of the city council by the next national election period stepwise.
The administration structure that had been functioning before the approval of this proclamation shall continue until the grades of the cities in the region are decided in accordance with this proclamation.
Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of article 23 of this proclamation, the designation and appointment of Mayor of Cities administration will continue until the election of council of city administration held.
Transfer of Rights and Obligations
The rights and obligations of the cities before the approval of this proclamation shall proceed in accordance with this proclamation.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directives
The regional state government administrative council may issue a regulation for the implementation of this proclamation.
The Bureau may issue directives for the implementation of this proclamation and the regulation to be issued.
Inapplicable Laws
Any proclamation, regulation, directive and customary practices contrary to this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered by this proclamation.
Urban Local Government Proclamation of Oromia National Regional State No. 65/2003 and its amendment proclamation No. 116/2006 are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
A Proclamation to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No. 163/ 2011 Article 61 Sub-articles (1-5 ) and proclamation No. 170/2012 article 2 sub article 3 (1-3) are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
Duty to Cooperate
Any organ shall have a duty to cooperate for the implementation of this proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall come into force as of its publication on MegeletaOromia
Finfinne This 2nd of October 2015
Muktar kedir President of Oromia National Regional state
A Proclamation to Amend/Revise Oromia National Regional State Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Establishment Proclamation No. 71/2003
Whereas, it has become necessary to strengthen the fight against corruption to prevent the effect of corruption and impropriety on th socio-economic development, good governance and the enhancement of democratic system in the region;
Whereas, it has become necessary to establish effective transparent and accountable system with a view to prevent corruption and impropriety, to expand and enhance ethical conduct in the society, and to prevent
and control acts of corruption and improprieties Prevailed in public offices, public enterprises and public organizations;
Whereas, it has become necessary to authorize the commission by giving  the power to investigate and prosecute corruption offences committed in public organizations by revising the existing ethics and anti corruption commission establishment proclamation.
Whereas, it has become necessary to establish a system of gathering evidences, investigate and prosecute corruption crimes with the view to confiscate properties acquired and reinstate damages sustained through corrupt practices.
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3)(a) of the revised Constitution of Oromia National Regional State, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Part One
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “The Oromia National Regional State Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Amendment Proclamation No. 197/2016”
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context requires otherwise:
“Region” shall mean Oromia National Regional State.
‘‘Government” means Oromia National Regional State governmet
“President” shall mean the President of Oromia National Regional State.
“Commission” shall mean the Oromia National Regional State Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission.
“Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner” shall mean the Commissioner and deputy commissioner of the Commission respectively.
“Public Office” shall mean any office of the region the budget of which is fully or partially allocated by regional government or at any level in which any government activity is performed.
“Public Enterprise” shall mean any Public Enterprise or Share Company in which the regional government has ownership share or is fully or partially be a member.
“Public Organization” shall mean private sector which in whatever way administers money or property or any other resource collected from members or public or money property collected for the benefit of the public or other body which administer these property or which includes appropriate company and it shall not include the following:
 Religious Organization;
 Political party or organization;
 International organization; and
 Edir or other similar associations having cultural or religious objective.
“Appropriate Company” shall mean any private limited company which is established through the contribution of shares of public organizations and joint venture share company including other organizations which have established partnership with such organizations.
“General Assembly” shall mean the general assembly of the Oromia National Regional State Anti- Corruption coalition.
“Public Official” shall mean any person who is appointed in any public office or public enterprise of the region; or any person elected by the people as a member of the Regional 'Caffee' or district or City Council or any appointee at all level or any appointee assigned or elected as a head or board member or as a manager of public organization.
“Appointee” shall mean any person appointed or elected or assigned at regional, zonal, district, city administration or kebele level in any manner as well as in accordance with the organizational structure of the respective public office or public enterprise or public organization or in accordance with a law or regulation or memorandum of association of the public enterprise, public office or public organization and in accordance with professional ethics of the respective profession.
“Employee of Public Organization” shall mean an employee who is employed, appointed or elected by members to work either temporarily or permanently in a public organization and include leader of the board of directors or any person or committee involved in the formation of a share company or a charity organization.
“Public Servant” shall mean any person who is recruited or assigned or elected to work either temporarily or permanently in a public office or public enterprise in the exception of the provisions stipulated under sub article 11 and 12 of this article .
“Temporary worker” shall mean a person who works full or part or during leave time with or without payment in a public office or public enterprise. or public organization without being a employed permanently and shall include apprentice.
“Basics Ethical Principles” shall mean systems or mechanisms or the necessary conditions and other similar activities established with the view to reduce substantially unethical conducts and to encourage ethical conducts, professional competency and propriety work practices in the region, particularly in the public service delivery.
“Grave Ethical Violations” shall mean any ethical violation which entails dismissal from a job in accordance with ethical code of public office or public enterprise.
“Corruption Offences” shall mean relevant provisions of Federal Criminal Law, corruption offences provided for by the Corruption Crimes Proclamation No. 881/2015, and includes offences provided as corruption crimes in other relevant laws.
“Grave Corruption Offence” shall mean:
 Corruption offences involving highly strategic public interest or huge money or property or transactions committed in Public Office, Public Enterprise or Public Organization; or
 Corruption offences involving a public official, appointed or elected individuals; or
 Corruption offences which cause or capable of causing a grave danger on the regional and national sovereignty, economy, security or life of the society.
“Informant” shall mean any person who provides information, where he believes that corruption offence is committed or to be committed, to appropriate organ or other justice organs, to the public office, public enterprise or to the head of public organization or anybody who is authorized to entertain corruption offences in accordance with the law or directives and shall include an auditor who audit the case relating to the corruption offence or an auditor who detects the commission of corruption offences in the course of his auditing duties and anyone who inspects or investigates such offences.
Terminate investigation, withdraw corruption charges, close investigation file, reinstitute terminated charges, reinstitute closed files in accordance with the law where it is necessary for the public interest. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Cause the reinstitution of benefit or advantage acquired through corruption offences, cause to be reinstituted, cause the corruption offences under proceeding or under investigation to be resolved out of court proceeding; The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Search, follow up, detain any person’s residence or work places or car or any other property in connection with investigation of corruption offences as it may be necessary in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code or other relevant law;
Cause the detention of persons suspected of corruption offences at Police station not exceeding 48:00 hours without court warrant in accordance with Criminal Procedure Code and Anticorruption Special Procedure and Rules of Evidence, take finger print and photograph of the suspects;
Interrogate any person in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code or other relevant laws take statement, order any person or institution receive produced evidence;
Gather evidence by the order of the commissioner where there is reasonable suspicion or sufficient evidence in connection with corruption offences regarding money or property or share to be found or deposited in the bank by the name of the suspect or his family or the deposit of such money is with the name of other person or an evidence show that there is a share, retrain the money or property by the order of the court as it may necessary;
Register, cause the registration of property and source of income of officials, elected person, appointee and civil servants of public enterprises as well as public organization in accordance with the law in collaboration with the concerned body, keep evidence, verify, give certificate, disclose to the public.
Restrain the assets of any person which is acquired, gained or proportion of the damage sustained through corruption offences under investigation by court order; where it is proved that the property of any person is being obtained or gained through corruption offences it shall forfeit by the court order, or cause reinstatement of property proportional to the damage sustained or shall deposit the income to the government through selling by auction or without selling such property by the court order;
Cause the preparation of code of ethics in public office, public enterprises and public organization, give professional support, ensure its preparation, follow up its implementation;
Follow up the observance of anticorruption laws and code of ethics, ensure its observance, cause its observance,
Give and cause to be given physical protection and job security to whistleblowers, witnesses and their family in accordance with the law in collaboration with concerned organs;
Summit to the authorized organ the suspension of immunity right of those person having such right suspected of corruption offences or to be prosecuted by such crime; investigate, prosecute upon approval;
Establish the system of evaluation and award through which persons or public offices or public enterprises or public organization or other institutions that are successful in the struggle undertaken to prevent and fight corruption; implement upon approval; follow up its implementation;
Work in collaboration with other organs of the region, other regions or Federal or other having similar objectives;
Cause the preparation of directives of ethics infrastructure, organizational structure and work procedures; follow up its implementation; summit report to concerned organ corrective measure to be taken in case of failure;
Own property, sue and can be sued;
Undertake other activities that support objective of the Commission;
Power and Duty of the Commissioner
The Commissioner shall have the following power and duty:
Leads the work of the Commission;
Implementsandcausestheimplementation of power and duties of the Commission provided under article 15 of this proclamation;
Recruits, administers and dismisses the employees of the Commission in accordance with general principles of Civil Servant law, this proclamation, regulation and directive issued to implement this proclamation;
Prepares work and budget plan of the Commission, submits to the president of the region, implements upon approval, cause its implementation;
Based on the work plan of the Commission, administers the budget allocated to the Commission in accordance with financial laws;
Organizes the commission with human and material resource; organize various department that enable to perform its power and duties entrusted to it by the law;
Orders heads of departments, investigator or public prosecutor of the commission to investigate, prosecute, detain or put under custody of those persons suspected of grand corruption offences in accordance with the law; The particulars shall be determined by the directive to be issued.
Gives order as it found necessary the search and collection of evidences regarding cases under investigation in respect of bank account of the suspect, his family, public offices, public enterprises, public organization or any other person having relation with the suspect.
Prepares work and financial performance report of the Commission and submit to the President of the region;
Represents the Commission in its relation with third party;
He may delegate part of his powers and duties to other officials or employees of the Commission for the effectiveness and efficiency of activities of the Commission;
PowerandDutiesofDeputyCommissioner
The accountability of the Deputy Commissioner shall be to the Commissioner and shall have the following power and duties:
Supports the Commissioner in planning, organizing, leading and coordinating functions of the Commission;
Leads core department of the Commission in accordance with organizational structure of the Commission;
Unless decided otherwise by the Commissioner, the senior appointee of the Deputy Commissioner shall represent the Commissioner in his absence;
Perform such other duties specifically entrusted to him by the Commissioner.
Term of Office and Removal of the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner
The term of office of the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner shall be six years; however, he may be reappointed where it found necessary;
The Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner may not be removed from his office before lapse of term of office, unless:
 he has violated rules of relevant code of conduct;
 he can no longer carry out his responsibilities on account of illness;
 he becomes incompetent and inefficient;
 he requests to be removed by his consent;
The Police and Prosecutorial Power of the Commission
The investigation and prosecutorial power entrusted to the regular Police and prosecution in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code and other laws in investigating, prosecuting and other matters specified under this proclamation shall be entrusted to Commission’s Police and prosecutor;
Without prejudice the provision of sub-article1of this article the Commissioner may delegate part the power of the Commission to other relevant body as it is found necessary;
Notwithstanding the provision of sub article 2 of this article, in case where any organ entrusted with the power to investigate offence has begun without having the power to investigate corruption offences shall notify the case to the Commission within five days from the commencement of such investigation. The Commission may order the investigation to continue or may take up such case.
Unless delegated by the Commission, any organ having prosecutorial power shall not have the power to prosecute corruption offences.
Confidentiality
Any employee of the Commission shall have a duty to keep the secrecy of facts he comes across while performing his duty unless it is ordered by the court or concerned head.
Recruitment and Administration of Employees of the Commission
The recruitment, administration, suspension and dismissal condition of the employees of the Commission shall be determined by the regulation to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this proclamation and general principles of civil servant laws of the region.
Rights and Duties of the Employees of the Commission
The employees of the Commission shall have the following rights:
 Every employees of the Commission shall obtain a salary and allowances in accordance with salary scale and allowances approved by the government.
 shall be provided with attorney service at the expense of the Commission for any responsibility or liability which is caused to him while he is performing his duty; the particulars shall be determined by the regulation to be issued;
 Is entitled with the right of pension, annual leave, sick leave, mourning leave, marriage leave, maternity leave as well as special leave in accordance with the relevant laws.
 Shall be entitled the protection of his right for the total or partial damage or accident he has sustained or ought to sustain in relation to his duties in accordance with pension law and other relevant laws.
The employees of the Commission shall have the following duties:
 to keep the secrecy of the facts he comes across and to give evidences while performing the power and duties of the Commission while he is in the Commission and after leaving the Commission.
 to observe and cause the observance of the laws and work procedures of the Commission.
Establishment of Ethics Basic Principles
Basic Ethics Principles shall be established in public offices, public enterprises and public organizations;
Basic Ethics Principles shall have work relation with the Commission; the detail shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Part Three
Miscellaneous Provisions
Source of Income
The Source of income of the Commission shall be from the budget allocated by the government.
Books of Account
The Commission shall have complete and accurate book of account.
The Commission’s book of account and financial documents shall be audited by the General Auditor of the region or an organ assigned by it.
Relations of the Commission with Other Organs
The Commission shall work in coordination and collaboration way with regional and federal anticorruption Commissions and other organs having similar objectives to strengthen ethics education, prevention, investigation, prosecution of corruption offences and reinstituting or the damages sustained through corruption offences with a view to create an awareness of the society which cannot tolerate corruption.
Duty to Cooperate and Notify
Without prejudice to the administrative or disciplinary measures taken by the public office, public enterprises or public organizations, where there is suspicion that serious ethical violation or corruption offence is committed they shall have a duty to report or notify immediately to the Commission or to the relevant authorized organ to investigate the matter.
Where there is a suspicion that acts of corruption offense is committed or ought to be committed any public office, public enterprises or public organization, official or employee shall notify to the Commission or to the organ authorized to investigate the matter.
Whosoever in connection with the power and duty of the Commission shall have a duty to cooperate, particularly, concerned public offices, public enterprises, public organization or any person shall have a duty to give necessary support where professional support is requested by the Commission.
Anybody authorized to investigate corruption offences in accordance with this proclamation may request at any time to have the access or be provided evidences which necessary for investigation in public offices, public enterprise, as well as public organizations of the region or federal government.
Without prejudice to this article sub article 4, heads or employees of any public offices, public enterprises or public organizations of the region or the federal government found in the region shall have a duty to show or to provide or to handover necessary evidences upon request by the Commission.
Every Police Commission structure of the region found at all level shall have a duty to give lawful support to the Commission in keeping the detainee or the custody of person by the Commission suspected of corruption offences.
Penalty
Unless punishable with severe penalty under other law:
Whosoever attempts to influence, harm or punish or who influences, harms or attempts to harm or punishes or attempts to punish any person who deliver information or evidence relating to corruption offences shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than three years and not exceeding fifteen years; and with fine not less than Birr six thousand and not exceeding Birr twenty five thousand.
Any official or employee of the Commission who abuses the powers and responsibilities legally entrusted to him, disclose secrecy, produce false evidence or destroy or conceal evidence without prejudice the forfeiture of any advantage gained there from, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than five years and not exceeding fifteen years, and with fine not less than Birr three thousand and not exceeding Birr ten thousand.
Whosoever, with the intent to mislead the Commission or to harm others, produce a false report or allegation or information to the Commission shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than one year and not exceeding five years; with fine not less than Birr three thousand and not exceeding Birr ten thousand.
Any officials or employee or whosoever violates article 27 of this proclamation or who fails to notify or not volunteer to support the Commission, shall be punishable with not less than six month and not exceeding four years imprisonment; and with fine not less than Birr one thousand and not exceeding Birr eight thousand.
Whosoever obstructs or attempts to obstruct the activities of the Commission shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than two years and not exceeding ten years; and with fine not less than Birr five thousand and not exceeding birr twenty thousand; where the offence is accompanied by violence, the penalty shall be the maximum penalty prescribed in this sub-article.
Whosoever commits a deceitful act by pretending as if the employee of the Commission shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than three years and not exceeding ten years; and with fine not less than Birr three thousand and not exceeding Birr ten thousand.
Whosoever disclose or publicize in written form or distribute an investigation of corruption offence is to commence or underway or knowing that the case is under investigation without the authorization of the investigator, shall be punishable with not less than six months and not exceeding four years imprisonment; and with fine not less than one thousand Birr and not exceeding five thousand.
Without prejudice the administrative measure taken by his respective institution, any public official or employee of public offices or public enterprise or public organization, who fails to inform the corruption offences committed to an organ authorized to investigate corruption offences being aware of it in his respective office or institution shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years and with fine not exceeding ten thousand Birr.
Where the offences specified insub-articles 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this article are committed by juridical persons responsible under the penal code, the punishment with a fine shall be five fold.
The Application of Other Laws
Anti-corruption Special Procedure and Rules of Evidence Law Issued by the Federal Government.
Transitory Provisions
Any corruption offences and cases committed in relation with corruption and whose investigation has been started or under investigation or under proceeding prior to the coming into force of this proclamation shall be resolved in accordance with the previous law.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directive
The regional administrative council may issue regulation for the implementation of this proclamation.
The Commission may issue directive for the implementation of this proclamation and regulation to be issued depending on this proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
Oromia Ethics and Anticorruption Commission Establishment Proclamation no. 71/2003 is hereby repealed by this proclamation.
Any Laws and work practices inconsistent with this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered under this proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force as of its publication on Megeleta Oromia.
Finfinne
April 3, 2016
Muktar Kedir
President of Oromia National Regional State
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public Enterprises Proclamation
WHEREAS, it is found necessary for the government to put an effort to bridge the market gap through capacity building by enhancing the role of the private sector in accelerating economic development for sustainability of the economic development;
WHEREAS, public enterprises have to continue under state ownership, it is necessary to provide them with such guidance so as to enable them to improve their effectiveness, to be competitive and profitable and thereby play appropriate role in the implementation of the economic development;
WHEREAS, it becomes necessary to establish clear and legal procedures that public enterprises follow in the free market economy, to participate in the stabilization of the market for public benefit and/or efficiently implementation of the mission given to them;
WHEREAS, to enable the Regulatory Authority, in leading and supporting public enterprises to fulfill their objectives efficiently, it is necessary to establish conducive environment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3 (a) of Proclamation No. 46/1994 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
CHAPTER ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Public Enterprise Proclamation No. 181/2013”.
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Authority” means Oromia Government
Public Enterprise Regulatory Authority.
“Board” means the management
board of government public enterprise.
“Net Profit” 
means any excess of all revenue and receipts over costs, salary and operating expenses properly attributable to the operations of the financial year including depreciation, interest and taxes.
“Public Enterprise” means a wholly
or partially state owned public enterprise established by the government to carry on manufacturing, distribution, construction service rendering or other economic development and related activities.
“Initial Capital” means total assets
assigned to the enterprise by the government at the time of its establishment and later.
“Regional Administrative Council”
means supreme excutive organ of the National Regional Government.
“Government” means the National
Regional Government of Oromia.
“Auditor” means a natural or juridical
person who is enpowered to audit the accounts of public enterprise.
“State Dividend” means the remaining
balance after deduction of legal reserve and other reserve from the net profit.
Powers and Duties of the Authority
The Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Prepares and submit policies, strategies and programs related to irrigation to the government and implement the same upon approval.
Undertake and cause the undertaking of the study, design, construction and scheme management of traditional, micro, small, medium and large scale irrigation.
Fully administer, follow up, execute technical work of those medium and large scale irrigations whose construction is completed up until the users are self sufficient to administer; conduct maintenance work and cause to conducted where it is found to be beyond the capacity of the users, and turn the administration over to them when they are self sufficient.
Undertake awareness creation advice and follow up on fee collection and saving to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of irrigation scheme.
Conserve the water resource in the region for sustainable irrigation development in collaboration with the concerned bodies.
Undertake drainage work where it is necessary in the region.
Undertake water harvesting for irrigation development.
Undertake a study with the concerned body on problems related with areas of irrigarion development, drainage, also on irrigation technology; coordinate; dessiminate research findings and improved technology; prepare demonstration plots.
Taking the responsibility of following up, supporting, strengthening micro and moisture irrigation to be undertaken by community.
Collaborate with stakeholders who contribute to the sustainability and growth of irrigation development.
Follow up, administer, irrigation development funds obtained from different funding agencies as grant or loan is utilized for the intended purpose and report its implimentation to concerned the bodies.
Shall handover completed small scale irrigation projects to the users, provide technical support, follow up, conduct maintenance, cause to be conducted where it is found beyond the capacity of the users.
Collect irrigation construction investment cost from the users; where it is allowed by the government invest it back on irrigation projects; collect different service and maintainance fees and utialize it back.
Select technologies that enables to speed up farming, work with the concerned bodies on the quality of the selected technologies.
Expand irrigation extension and irrigation development farming advisory service.
Identify, record and scale up best practice of irrigation development from all levels and disseminate.
Strengthen community participation on irrigation development.
Organize water user associations, train, assist and follow up in the the preparation of thier by laws also work with the concerned bodies for them to get legal personality.
Work and facilitate conditions for women and youth to be participants and users of irrigation development;
Gives necessary technical support and supervise those organs working on irrigation development.
Look for fund through different methods for irrigation and drainage coverage increment.
Work with the concerned bodies to minimize the negative impact that irrigation development may cause on the environment and human being.
Evaluate, the outcome and problems of irrigation development and drainage works undertaken at any level.
Works with the concerned bodies to supply different irrigation farming development inputs that assists in increasing production and productivity.
Facilitate conditions with the concerned body for irrigation development users to get credit service; and follow up.
Works with concerned bodies to control migratory and regular pests which can affect irrigation crop product.
Works with concerned body on conservation and watershade development related with irrigation development areas based on the regional watershade development guideline.
Impliment irrigation development related laws in the region.
Use water without permission for small scale irrigation development for the benefit of the community.
Facilitate conditions for farmers and pastoralists to produce market oriented products and work with the concerned body for them to get market for their products.
Work with the concerned body to cause payment of compensation to those affected by construction of irrigation development in accordance with the law.
Give capacity building training to upgrade the execution capacity of experts and users of irrigation development; provide the required material for the employees; facilitate conditions and follow up its outcome.
Own property, enter into contract, sue and be sued.
Power and Duties of the General Manager
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties;
The General Manager executes the power and duties given to the Authority;
Plan, organize, coordinate, direct, administer and control the activities of the Authority;
Employ, administer and fire employees in accordance with the civil service law of the region;
Represent the Authority in all its dealings with third parties;
Prepare and submit plan and annual budget to the government and implement the same upon approval;
Administer the budget, open and operate bank accounts of the Authority
Prepare and submit financial and performance report of the Authority to the regional government;
Where found necessary for the effective performance of his activities, may delegate part of his powers and duties to the officials that are accountable to him.
Power and Duties of the Deputy General Manager
Where in the absence of the General Manager acts on behalf of him;
Execute works given by the General Manager.
PART THREE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Source of Income
The source of income for the Authority is the allocated budget by the government, financial assistance and fees paid for different services.
Books of Account
The Authority shall keep complete book of account and financial documents.
Audit  
The books of account and property of the Authority shall be audited by the Auditor General of Oromia or by an auditor represented by it.
Powers to Iissue Regulation
The Administrative Council of the National Regional State of Oromia may issue a Regulation to execute this Proclamation. 
Provision of Transition
Rights and obligation related to irrigation development which was given to Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau is transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation;
Works related to irrigation development which were constructed and those that are under construction by Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Works related to irrigation scheme administration activities which were undertaken by Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise, assets, data and materials for this work are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Assets, data and materials which were used for irrigation development activities at Oromia Agricultural Bureau and Oromia Water Mine and Energy are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Repealed Laws
Article 17 Sub-Article 13, 20, 21, 22 and 23 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs Proclamation are repealed by this Proclamation;
Article 24 Sub-Article 2, 3 and 4 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs are repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Article 2(b) of Regulation No. 58/2005 issued to amend Regulation No. 14/1999, Regulation to Provide the Amendment of Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise Establishment is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistent with matters provided for under this Proclamation shall be inapplicable.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 13th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa President of the National Regional State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 13th of July 2013